
Chapter 12
(Tape 25 / Ps: 1-44)

Chapter 12 deals with the supernormal powers, direct knowledge. We have a glimpse of direct knowledge in the previous chapter. In this chapter the different kinds of direct knowledge are explained. In this chapter there are a lot of stories. What we should note is that there are five kinds of direct knowledge. In paragraph 2 they are listed as 1. Performing some kinds of miracles, 2. The knowledge of the Divine Ear (That means hearing sounds far away, hearing sounds that cannot normally be heard.), 3. The knowledge of Penetration of Minds (That means reading other people몭s minds.), 4. The knowledge of Recollection of Past  Lives, 5. The knowledge of Passing  Away and Reappearance of Beings. These are called direct knowledge. 

If the meditator wants to achieve the supernormal powers, he must achieve the eight attainments (the eight jh?nas) on each of the eight kasi?as ending with the white kasi?a. That is the first eight kasi?as and the last two are left out. What are the last two?  Space and light. Space is left out because it cannot be the basis for attaining immaterial jh?nas. The Sub-Commentary explains that the light kasi?a is to be taken as the same as white kasi?a. In the Visuddhi Magga only eight kasi?as are mentioned. The sub-Commentary says that we can also take the light kasi?a, that it is included in the white kasi?a.

You have to make yourself very familiar with the kasi?as and the jh?nas. There are 14 ways to make yourself familiar with these jh?nas. That is in the order of the kasi?as, in the reverse order of the kasi?as and so on. So you enter into jh?na on this kasi?a, and then the next jh?na on this kasi?a, and the next jh?na on this kasi?a. Then again you enter into first jh?na on this kasi?a and then first jh?na on another kasi?a and so on. It is in order to make you very familiar with the jh?nas and the kasi?as that you have to go in many different ways.

At the end of paragraph 10 the Giribha??avahana offering is mentioned and there is a footnote. In P??i the word for an island and a lamp is the same. It is the word 몬d?pa몭. He took d?pap|j? to mean island offering. It is a light offering. During that festival lights are offered at different places 몮starting with the Cetiyagiri and extending over the whole island and up to a league in the sea.몯 That is light offering festival, not island offering.

There are many stories in this chapter. Some of the stories have been given already in the chapters that we have read. Many may be new to you. I want to give you the page numbers of some stories if you want to read in more detail. At the end of paragraph 28 a reference is given for the Dhammapada Commentary. If you have the book Buddhist Legends, you may read part 2, page 238. At the end of paragraph 29 no reference is given, but I have the reference. Please read Buddhist Legends, part 3, page 179. Then at the end of paragraph 32 you may read Middle Length Sayings, first volume, page 396. At the end of paragraph 33 the reference may be found in Buddhist Legends, part 2, page 246. For the next paragraph the reference can be found in Buddhist Legends, part 3, page 103. For paragraph 35 the story may be found in Buddhist Legends, part 1, page 286. Paragraph 41 the first reference can be found in Buddhist Legends, part 3, page 319. The second reference is in Buddhist Legends, part 3, page 327. The third reference in this paragraph may be found in Buddhist Legends, part 1, page 256. The last reference in this paragraph may be found in Buddhist legends, part 3, page 130. Then at the end of paragraph 42 you may find that reference in Buddhist legends, part 2, page 59. these are the references.

At the end of paragraph 41 it says 몮made of the seven gems.몯 Actually it is made of the seven precious things. The seven precious things are gold, silver and other jewels.

In the part that we have covered the ten kinds of success power (iddhi) are given. All of them are interesting. So if you have time please study it again. There is one thing that is very interesting. In paragraph 26 몮A distinction brought about by the influence of knowledge either before the arising of the knowledge or after it or at that moment is called success by intervention of knowledge.몯 If a person is going to become an Arahant in that life, he will not die without becoming an Arahant. The  knowledge of Arahantship which he is going to acquire in that life protects him from being killed even though an attempt is made on his life. That is a very strange thing. If you are going to become an Arahant, you will not die without becoming an Arahant. Nothing can cause you to be killed.

The first story is of Venerable Bakkula. In this story he was swallowed by a fish. His mother was bathing him in the river and he was swallowed by a fish. The fish was caught by a fisherman and sold to a lady. The lady wanted to cook the fish, so she cut it open and found the child still alive there. So he did not die in the stomach of the fish because he was destined to reach enlightenment in that life. That몭s why he was not killed. Normally he would not survive being swallowed by a fish.

The next story is about Venerable Sa~kicca. While he was in the womb, his mother died. As was the custom in those days they tried to cremate the body. When they cremate the body, they use sticks. One stick hit the child. He made a noise. When they heard the noise, they cut open the belly of the woman and got the child. He was named Sa~kicca because he was injured by the stick which is called in P??i sa~ku. That is why he was called Sa~kicca.

So many stories are given. There is also the story of Bh|tap?la. Also those who are in attainment cannot be harmed. Such stories begin in paragraph 30. Venerable S?riputta was in attainment and so no harm could come to him. It is a similar case with Venerable Sa?j?va and so on. I think we had reference to the devotee Uttara some weeks back and also to Samm?vati. They are to us miracles. 

These miracles are caused by the intervention of concentration or the intervention of knowledge and so on. These are interesting stories. Some are not caused by any concentration or any meditation. The fact that birds can fly is also called a success or miracle. They got that ability just by birth, just by being born as a bird. So they can fly and we cannot. So these ten kinds of success are mentioned in the first part of this chapter. OK.

                                        S?dhu!          S?dhu!           S?dhu!
                                           (Tape 26 / Ps: 45 - 118)

Up until paragraph 45 the ten kinds of success were described. Among them the first one is 몮only (1) success by resolve is actually mentioned in the clause 몬kinds of supernormal power (success)몭몯- it is from the Texts - 몮but (2) success as transformations and (3) success as the mind-made [body] are needed in this sense as well.몯 In the clause 몬kinds of supernormal power or supernormal success몭 we should take not only one but three of the kinds of success mentioned above. 

Now the Commentator goes on explaining the other clauses in the Text. 몮To the kinds of supernormal power: to the components of supernormal power, or to the departments of supernormal power.몯 That means the constituents of supernormal power.

몮He directs, he inclines, his mind: When that bhikkhu몭s consciousness has become the basis for direct knowledge in the way already described, he directs the preliminary work consciousness with the purpose of attaining the kinds of  supernormal power, he sends it in the direction of the kinds of supernormal power, leading it away from the kasi?a as its object.몯 In order to do a supernormal thing first the meditator enters into jh?nas. He makes the fourth jh?na of the fourfold method the basis of supernormal . power or supernormal knowledge. The bhikkhu몭s consciousness has become the basis for direct knowledge in the way already described. 몮He directs the preliminary work consciousness with the purpose of attaining the kinds of supernormal power.몯 After entering into the fourth jh?na, he emerges from the fourth jh?na. Then he does the preparation work for the supernormal knowledge. 몬Preliminary work consciousness몭 means k?m?vacara (sense-sphere) consciousness. 몮He sends it in the direction of the kinds of supernormal power.몯 That means he inclines his mind towards that.

몮Inclines: makes it tend and lean towards the supernormal power to be attained.몯 These are word explanations, so they are repetitive. 몮He: the bhikkhu who has done the directing of his mind in this way. The various: varied, of different sorts. Kinds of supernormal power: departments of supernormal power. Wields: paccanubhoti - paccanubhavati (alternative form).몯 Sometimes it cannot be translated into English or another language because the two words are just variations. The second word is just a variation of the first word. There is no difference in meaning. Paccanubhoti and paccanubhavati are the same. In the first word the 몬A몭 should be short, not long. The only difference between the words is that one is ending in 몬bhota몭 and the other is ending in 몬bhavati몭. It is just a grammatical peculiarity. 몮The meaning is that he makes contact with, realizes, reaches.몯

The Commentator is going to show us one by one the supernormal powers a monk may perform. 몮Now in order to show that variousness, it is said: 몬Having been one, [he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one몭.몯 Actually this Text has not been given in full in the Visuddhi Magga because the Commentator takes it that his readers already know this passage. We are lucky that the translator gives us the full Text here. That is why the brackets appear.

몮Having been one, [he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one.몯 That means he multiplies himself. He will create many likenesses of himself, hundreds or thousands. "He appears and vanishes. He goes unhindered through walls, through enclosures, through mountains, as though in open space. He dives in and out of the earth as though in water. He goes on unbroken water as though on earth. Seated cross-legged he travels in space like a winged bird. With his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so mighty and powerful. He wields bodily mastery even as far as the Brahm? World.몯 This is taken from the D?gha Nik?ya.

Now the Commentator will explain one by one. 몮Herein, having been one: having been normally one before giving effect to the supernormal power.몯 A monk is only one, but here he is going to make likenesses of himself. He is going to create images. 몮He becomes many: wanting to walk with many or wanting to do a recital or wanting to ask questions with many, he becomes a hundred or a thousand. But how does he do this? He accomplishes (1) the four planes, (2) the four bases (roads), (3) the eight steps, (4) the sixteen roots of supernormal power and then he (5) resolves with knowledge.몯 Here 몬planes몭 means stories, as in one story, two stories high and so on. The P??i word used is bh|mi. 몬Bh|mi몭 can mean planes of existence as well as floors in a building.

몮The four planes should be understood as the four jh?nas.몯 The four jh?nas are said to be the four planes or the four stages for the supernormal power. Four jh?nas here is according to the fourfold method.

몮For this has been said by the General of the Dhamma.몯 That means the Elder S?riputta. Venerable S?riputta was called 몬the General of the Dhamma몭 by other monks.

몮What are the four planes of supernormal power?몯 This is taken from the Pa?isambhid?magga. You will find the reference in the middle of paragraph 49.

몮And he reaches supernormal power by becoming light, malleable and wieldy in body after steeping himself in blissful perception and light perception due to the pervasion of happiness and pervasion of bliss, which is why the first three jh?nas should be understood as the accessory plane since they lead to the obtaining of supernormal power in this manner. But the fourth is the natural plane for obtaining supernormal power.몯 That means he enters into first jh?na, second jh?na, third jh?na and fourth jh?na. 몮The fourth jh?na is the natural plane for obtaining supernormal power.몯 That means the fourth jh?na is the basis for supernormal power. Without entering into and emerging from the fourth jh?na, nobody can exercise the supernormal powers. 몬The four planes몭 mean the four jh?nas, the four material jh?nas. 

몮The four bases (roads) should be understood as the four bases of success.몯 The P??i word is iddhip?da, roads to power. Here 몬roads몭 means just causes of.

몮For this is said: 몬What are the four bases for success? Here a bhikkhu develops the basis for success (road to power) that possesses both concentration due to zeal and the will to strive; he develops the basis for success (road to power) that possesses both concentration due to energy and the will to strive; he develops the basis for success (road to power) that possesses both concentration due to [natural purity of] consciousness and the will to strive; he develops the basis for success (road to power) that possesses both concentration due to inquiry and the will to strive.몯 몬Inquiry몭 really means pa??? (knowledge), not just inquiring. The P??i word is v?ma?s?.  The Sanskrit word is m?ma?s?. 몬M?ma?s?몭 means investigation. Here 몬investigation몭 does not necessarily mean just to investigate, but it means to investigate and understand correctly. It is the name for pa???.

몮These four bases for success lead to the obtaining of supernormal power.. to the fearlessness due to supernormal power몯 and so on. What are these four? Did you get four?  Zeal is one thing. The P??i word is chanda. It is just the will-to-do.  Chanda has two meanings - sometimes it is just the will-to-do and sometimes it is the desire for sensual things. Here it is just the will-to-do, not the desire for sensual things. The first one is chanda. The second one is energy (viriya). The third is consciousness (citta). And the fourth is inquiry or pa???. These four are called 몬iddhip?da, roads to power or causes of power. So a person has to develop these four qualities in order to get supernormal power. 

몮And here the concentration that has zeal as its cause, or has zeal outstanding, is concentration due to zeal.몯 That means zeal which is prominent. 몮This is a term for concentration obtained by giving precedence to zeal consisting in desire to act.몯 It is just the desire to act. It is not attachment to sensual things.

몮Will (formation) as endeavor is will to strive.몯 This is the word explanation. 몮This is a term for the energy of right endeavor accomplishing its fourfold function.몯 Among the 37 constituents of enlightenment there are the four great efforts. Here they are called 몬right endeavor몭. They are trying to get rid of akusala that has arisen in the past, avoiding akusala, getting kusala, and developing kusala. With regard to akusala there are two kinds of endeavor and also with regard to kusala there are two kinds of endeavor. 몮Possesses: is furnished with concentration due to zeal and with the [four] instances of the will to strive.몯 

몮Road to power (basis for success): The meaning is the total of consciousness and its remaining concomitants [except the concentration and the will], which are, in the sense of resolve, the road to (basis for) the concentration due to zeal and will to strive associated with the direct knowledge consciousness, which latter are themselves termed 몬power (success)몭 either by treatment as 몬production몭 or in the sense of  몬succeeding몭 or by treatment in this way, 몬beings succeed by its means, thus they are successful; they are enriched, promoted몭.몯 It is still hard to understand this passage. This phrase, 몬road to power몭, has two words, 몬road몭 and 몬power몭. In P??i the words are 몬iddhi몭 and 몬p?da몭. 몬Iddhi몭 means simply energy and concentration. Here they are called 몬iddhi (success or power)몭. 몬P?da몭 really means their basis. Their basis is what? Consciousness and its remaining concomitants. It is not accurate here. It should be the remaining consciousness and its concomitants. In order to understand this you have to understand supernormal power consciousness. When a person achieves this power, there arises in his mind a kind of consciousness. That kind of consciousness is called 몬supernormal power consciousness몭. Along with that consciousness there are mental factors, many mental factors. Among them the two, concentration and energy, are called 몬iddhi몭 here. The consciousness and the other mental factors are called 몬road몭 or 몬power몭 (p?da). By the compound word 몬iddhip?da몭 is meant the supernormal power consciousness and its concomitants. 

몮The meaning is,몯- 몬total is not a good here and there is no 몬total몭 in the original - 몮consciousness and its concomitants [except the concentration and the will],몯 - 몬will몭 here means actually energy, not chanda - 몮which are, in the sense of resolve,몯 - in the sense of basis, not in the sense of resolve. 몮In the sense of basis the road to the concentration due to zeal and will to strive associated with the direct knowledge consciousness.몯

Student: Will to strive?

Teacher: 몬Will to strive몭 means -

Student: Citta?

Teacher: No. it is energy or effort. 몬Will to strive몭 really means striving.

Student: Viriya?

Teacher: The word used here is not simply viriya. There are two compound words used here - chanda sam?dhi and padh?na sa~kh?ra. 몬Chanda sam?dhi몭 means sam?dhi caused by chanda and chanda is will. 몬Padh?na sa~kh?ra몭 means striving, striving formation. That means viriya (energy or effort). They are explained in paragraph 51. 몮Will as endeavor is will to strive.몯 It is not chanda here. It is viriya. Concentration and energy are called 몬iddhi몭 here and consciousness and the other remaining concomitants are called 몬p?da (road)몭. So 몬iddhip?da몭 means the direct knowledge consciousness and the concomitants and then concentration and energy. This is just the word explanation.
 
몮Or alternatively: it is arrived at by means of that thus that is a road; it is reached, is the meaning.몯 That meaning is arrived at.

몮Iddhip?da = iddhiy? p?da (resolution of compound) this is a term for zeal, etc., according as it is said.몯 Iddhip?da is made to mean the four things - will-to-do, energy, consciousness, and inquiry or pa???.

Student: What is the P??i word for consciousness?

Teacher: Citta. Next paragraph 54 몮The eight steps should be understood as the eight beginning with zeal.몯 Actually there are only four roads to success, but here concentration is combined with each, so we have eight.

몮If a bhikkhu obtains concentration, obtains unification of mind, supported by zeal, then the zeal is not the concentration; the concentration is not the zeal. The zeal is one, the concentration is another.몯 So we get two here, zeal and concentration. In the next sentence we have energy and concentration. In the next we have consciousness and concentration. Last we have inquiry and concentration. So we have eight steps or we can call them eight causes. These eight steps one has to perform, by just trying to get into jh?na and developing them.

In paragraph 55 we have the sixteen roots. 몮The mind몭s unperturbedness should be understood in sixteen modes, for this is said.몯 Here the sixteen modes are given. 몮What are the sixteen roots of success (power)?몯 Undejected consciousness, this is one. Unelated consciousness, this is another. Unattracted consciousness is another and so on. There are sixteen all together.

In about the middle of the paragraph 몮Consciousness rid of barriers is not perturbed by the barrier of defilement.몯 Here 몬consciousness with barriers몭 means the distractions that come in between the moments of sam?dhi. It is not moments of sam?dhi following one after the other. There are something like buffers between moments of sam?dhi. When a person몭s sam?dhi is not yet good, he will have these distractions or thoughts in between the sam?dhi moments. If it is like that, it is called 몬consciousness with barriers몭. If the sam?dhi is one uninterrupted flow, it is called 몬consciousness rid of barriers몭. Here 몬consciousness몭 means consciousness accompanied by concentration, concentrated consciousness.

Paragraph 56 몮Of course, this meaning is already established by the words 몬When his concentrated mind몭, etc., too, but it is stated again for the purpose of showing that the first jh?na, etc., are the three planes몯 - let us strike out 몬three몭. There is no word for 몬three몭 in the original and it does not fit here. There are four planes, not three. So the first jh?na, etc., are the planes of success to supernormal power, bases of, steps of and roots of success to supernormal power. In order to show that it is mentioned again.

몮And the first-mentioned method is the one given in the Suttas, but this is how it is given in the Pa?isambhid?magga.몯 There are two kinds of treatment. The one is given in the Suttas and the other is given in the Pa?isambhid?magga. The Pa?isambhid?magga is said to be later than the Suttas. It is ascribed to Venerable S?riputta. If that is true, it may not be so much later than the Suttas. The Pa?isambhid?magga is something like a Commentary, but not exactly a Commentary. It resembles a Commentary on some teachings in the Suttas. Venerable Buddhaghosa has very great respect for that book, the Pa?isambhid?magga. Whenever he wrote about meditation, he always quoted from the Pa?isambhid?magga. So we have many quotations in the Visuddhi Magga from the Pa?isambhid?magga. Today we will find many quotes. 몮So it is stated again for the purpose of avoiding confusion in each of the two instances.몯 

Paragraph 57 몮He resolves with knowledge.몯 These words also appear in paragraph 48. 몮When he has accomplished these things consisting of planes, bases (roads), steps, and roots, of success (to supernormal power), then he attains jh?na as the basis for direct knowledge and emerges from it.몯 Here the author is describing how one goes about it until one reaches the direct knowledge consciousness. What is the first thing to do? He obtains jh?na as the basis for direct knowledge and emerges from it. So first he attains first jh?na, second jh?na, third jh?na, and the fourth jh?na. Then he makes that a basis for direct knowledge and emerges from it.

몮Then if he wants to become a hundred, he does the preliminary work thus 몬let me become a hundred, let me become a hundred몭.몯 That is the second stage. That is called 몬the preliminary work몭. That is done by k?m?vacara consciousness, not by r|p?vacara consciousness. Then he enters into jh?na and in jh?na only r|p?vacara consciousness arises. Then he emerges from jh?na and does the preliminary work 몬Let me become a hundred, let me become a hundred몭. He does this with cittas belonging to the sense-sphere. 몮After which he again attains the jh?na.몯 Again he enters into jh?na, the fourth jh?na, as a basis for direct knowledge. Then he emerges from it and resolves. So he makes a determination then. 몮He becomes  a hundred simultaneously with the resolving consciousness.몯 That 몬resolving consciousness몭 really means direct knowledge. There are four stages. First there is the basic jh?na. Then there is preliminary work. And again there is basic jh?na. And last there is direct knowledge. So there are four stages.

몮If he does not succeed in this way, he should do the preliminary work again, and attain, emerge, and resolve, a second time. For it is said in the Sa?yutta Commentary that it is allowable to attain once or twice.몯 He may try once or twice.

몮Herein, the basic jh?na consciousness has the sign as its object.몯 몬Sign몭 means the counterpart sign. The object of jh?nas is the counterpart sign. The object of basic jh?na consciousness is the counterpart sign.  

몮But the preliminary work consciousnesses have the hundred as their object or the thousand as their object.몯 Preliminary work is done by k?m?vacara consciousness. So the counterpart sign is not the object of these cittas. If he wants to become a hundred, then a hundred is the object. If he wants to become a thousand, then a thousand is the object.

몮And these latter are objects as appearances, not as concepts.몯 몬Appearances몭 means visible objects - just as visible objects and not as concepts.

몮The resolving consciousness has likewise the hundred as its object or the thousand as its object.몯 몬Resolving consciousness몭 really means direct knowledge consciousness. So it has a hundred or a thousand as its object.

몮That arises once only, next to change-of-lineage [consciousness], as in the case of absorption consciousness already described.몯 It is said that the direct knowledge consciousness arises only once and then disappears. Jh?na consciousness at the first attainment arises only once and then disappears. Later on when that person wants to spend some time with jh?na only, he enters into that jh?na. At that time jh?na citta may arise in succession for one hour, two hours, or the whole day. This direct knowledge consciousness arises only once. It is actually a kind of fourth jh?na consciousness. It is not the same as the fourth jh?na consciousness, but it is reckoned as fourth jh?na consciousness. The difference is that direct knowledge consciousness does not take the counterpart sign as object. It takes the hundred appearances or the thousand appearances, or whatever it may be as object. That is the difference.

Student: It takes the same object as the k?m?vacara consciousness?

Teacher: Same as the preliminary consciousness, right. Here the preliminary consciousness takes a hundred or a thousand as object. The direct knowledge consciousness also takes that object.

This page is important for Abhidhamma students when they read the ninth chapter. In the ninth chapter the direct knowledge is treated very briefly. Students may take something from here.

Student: I몭m not understanding the difference between appearance and concept. Appearance seems like a concept.

Teacher: 몬Appearance몭 means - you know paramattha (ultimate reality). What it takes is something like color. When we see something, we actually see color. We see with our eyes the color. Then we think we see a form or a shape. That is we think that we see them or we see with manodv?r?vajjana mentally the shape or form. But what we really see is the visible data. In the same way what the preliminary consciousness takes is the visible data, not the concept of a man, or a monk, or something like that.

몮Normally one, he adverts to [himself as] many or a hundred or a thousand; having adverted, he resolves with knowledge 몬Let me be many몭. He becomes many like the Venerable C|?a Panthaka. Here he adverts is said with respect only to the preliminary work. Having adverted, he resolves with knowledge is said with respect to the knowledge of the direct knowledge (abhi???). Consequently he adverts to many. After that he attains with the last one of the preliminary work consciousnesses.몯 Instead of 몬with몭 it should be 몬after몭 the last of the preliminary work consciousnesses. There are four or three moments of preliminary work consciousness. Then there is direct knowledge consciousness. So it is not with the last one, but after the last one that he attains the direct knowledge consciousness. 

몮After emerging from the attainment, he again adverts thus 몬Let me be many몭, after which he resolves by means of the single [consciousness] belonging to the knowledge of direct knowledge몯 - so the direct knowledge consciousness arises only once - 몮which has arisen next to the three, or four, preparatory consciousnesses that have occurred (몬Preparatory consciousness몭 means preliminary consciousness.), and which has the name resolve 몬owing to its making the decision몭.몯 The last one is called 몬resolve몭. 몮This is how the meaning should be understood here.몯 In a thought process for abhi??? there will be four or three k?m?vacara thought moments and then the fourth jh?na. That fourth jh?na is called 몬abhi???몭 or 몬direct knowledge몭. Then life-continuum follows. It is so powerful that just by arising once it can create miracles. 

몮like the Venerable C|?a Panthaka is said in order to point to a bodily witness of this multiple state.몯 몬Bodily witness몭 really means direct witness. It is not hearsay. 몮That must be illustrated by this story.몯 I think that I have told this story many times. C|?a Panthaka was born very dull. He could not even learn a four line stanza for four months. It is said that he learned one line in one month. Then when he went to the next line, he lost the first one. After the fourth month he had nothing. So his brother said 몮You are useless in this dispensation.몯, and expelled him from the monastery. Now his brother was an Arahant, but here he seemed to be angry with him. Actually he was not useless. He was going to be an Arahant a few moments later. The elder brother was not as wise as the Buddha. His opinion was that his younger brother was useless because he could not learn even four lines of a stanza. If he could not learn, he would not be able to practice. In order to practice you have to know something. You have to learn something from the teacher. That is why he said 몮You are useless in this dispensation.몯 But the Buddha would turn him into a very useful disciple. 

He became an Arahant. The next day when the others went to take a meal at An?thapi??ika몭s house, he was left behind. At that time he was an Arahant. The Buddha wanted to let other people know that he had become an Arahant. At the end of the water-offering ceremony the Buddha covered his bowl. That means pouring water on the hand of the Buddha or the one who accepts. It is symbolic. It is like we do now at the water-pouring ceremony. The ceremony is done before eating here in the story. In Sri Lanka they still do this way. Lay people bring food to the monastery or invite monks to their houses. They offer food to the monks and then one of the monks does this ceremony. Then the monks eat. But in our country (Myanmar) the ceremony is done after eating. There is a difference of customs.  

Here the Buddha did it before eating. When the gruel was being given out at the end of the ceremony, he covered his bowl. He did not accept the gruel. 몮J?vaka asked 몬What is it, Venerable Sir?몭 - 몬There is a bhikkhu at the monastery몭.몯 So there is one bhikkhu left. Somebody was sent to take him to that place. But at that time - 
     몮Now, having multiplied himself
       Up to a thousand, Panthaka
       Sat in the pleasant mango wood
       Until the time should be announced.몯
He was waiting. He had created himself into a thousand monks. When the people went there, they saw many monks. So they went back and reported to the Buddha 몮The monastery is crowded with bhikkhus. I do not know which of them the lord is (which of them is C|?a Panthaka).몯 

몮Then the Blessed One said 몬Go and catch hold of the hem of the robe of the first one you see; tell him 몮The Master calls you몯 and bring him here몭. He went and caught hold of the robe of the Elder himself.몯 That means he managed to take hold of the Elder and  not one of the created images. Even if he took hold of the robe of one of the images, all the images would disappear and just Venerable C|?a Panthaka would remain. The man happened to take hold of the robe of the Elder himself. 몮At once all the creations vanished.몯

So Venerable C|?a Panthaka went there and took the meal. Then the Buddha left him to give a Dhamma talk. When he became an Arahant, he was endowed with the supernormal knowledge and all of the jh?nas. Now he was able to repeat all of what the Buddha had taught. It is not mentioned in this book, but in the Dhammapada Commentary it is mentioned that the Buddha left him to give a Dhamma talk. He gave a good talk, basing his talk on the whole of the Tipi?aka.

Student: Which he could now memorize?

Teacher: Right. This is the story of Venerable C|?a Panthaka. We will have many stories today. 

몮The many who were created there were just like the possessor of the supernormal power because they were created without particular specification.몯 If there is specification, they will appear as specified. If there is no specification, all the creations will be doing as the monk does. If he is sitting, they will all be sitting. If he is walking, they will all be walking. However here Venerable C|?a Panthaka did not do that way. Here the jh?na is entered. Then there is emergence from the jh?na and resolution. Next the jh?na is entered. Then he emerges and resolves again and again. 몮May some be walking, may some be sitting, may some be reciting.몯 It is something like that. The meditator has to be very familiar with entering into and emerging from jh?na. 

Paragraph 68 몮The same method of explanation applied to the clause having been many, he becomes one, but there is this difference. After the bhikkhu has thus created a manifold state, then he again thinks, 몬As one only I will walk about, do a recital, ask a question몭 or out of fewness of wishes he thinks 몬This is a monastery with few bhikkhus. If someone comes, he will wonder 몮Where have all these bhikkhus who are all alike come from?  Surely it will be one of the Elder몭s feats?몯 and so he might get to know about me몭. Meanwhile wishing 몬Let me be one only, he should attain the basic jh?na and emerge. Then after doing the preliminary work thus 몬Let me be one몭, he should again attain and emerge and then resolve thus 몬Let me be one몭. He becomes one simultaneously with the resolving consciousness.몯 If he wants to become one again, he has to enter into jh?na and emerge and make resolution. Simultaneously with the direct knowledge consciousness he becomes one again.

몮But instead of doing this, he can automatically become one again with the lapse of the predetermination.몯 That is he makes a resolution 몮May there be a thousand monks for one hour or two hours몯. Then at the end of one hour or two hours they will all disappear. If he wants the creations to disappear before that time, then he has to enter into jh?na and get the direct knowledge consciousness.

몮He appears and vanishes.몯 So he can appear before people or he can vanish from the view of the people.

몮Now this possessor of supernormal power who wants to make an appearance makes darkness into light, or he makes revealed what is hidden, or he makes what has not come into the visual field come into the visual field. How? If he wants to make himself or another visible even though hidden or at a distance, he emerges from the basic jh?na and adverts thus 몬Let this that is dark become light몭 or 몬Let this that is hidden be revealed몭 and so on.몯

몮But by whom was this miracle formerly performed? By the Blessed One. For when the Blessed One had been invited by C|?a Subhadd? and was traversing the seven league journey between S?vatthi and S?keta and with 500 palanquins created by Vissakamma (That is a god or celestial being.), he resolved in suchwise that citizens of S?keta saw the inhabitants of S?vatthi and citizens of S?vatthi saw the inhabitants of S?keta. And when he had alighted in the center of the city, he split the earth in two and showed Av?ci (the hell), and he parted the sky in two and sowed the Brahm? World.몯 It is Buddha몭s miracle letting people in this city see people in another city, like letting people in San Francisco see people in Los Angeles without going there. 

몮This meaning should also be explained by means of the Descent of the Gods (devorohana). When the Blessed One, it seems, had performed the Twin Miracle and had liberated 84,000 beings from bonds, he wondered 몬Where did the Past Enlightened Ones go to when they had finished the Twin Miracle몭?몯 This is a story connected with how the Buddha taught the Abhidhamma to the celestial beings. In his seventh year Buddha went up to Tavati?s? heaven after he had performed the Twin Miracle. I think later on we will know what the Twin Miracle is. He went up to Tavati?s? heaven and took up residence there for the rains. That means he observed the Vasa there for three months by human reckoning. He taught Abhidhamma there to the deities of 10,000 world-spheres.  몮At the time for wandering for alms he created an artificial Buddha to teach the Dhamma.몯 I think I have told you about this story. This is what Therav?da Buddhists believe. We believe that the Buddha went to Tavati?s? heaven and taught Abhidhamma non-stop to the celestial beings there. When it was time to go for alms, he left a created image and went to Uttarakur|s (northern kur|s) it is said. He took food at Lake Anotatta. There Venerable S?riputta met him. Then the Buddha would tell him in brief what portions of the Abhidhamma he had taught. Buddha taught the deities for three months.  

Many people who saw the Twin Miracles did not leave that place because the Buddha just disappeared. They were yearning to see the Buddha again. Buddha simply disappeared from their field of vision. The people were waiting there for the Buddha to come back. At the end of the Vasa Venerable Mah? Moggall?na went up to the Buddha and asked where he would descend into the world of human beings. The Buddha told him that he would appear at Sa~kassa. On the specified day the Buddha came back to the human world. That was on the last day of the three month rainy season retreat for monks. So it was on the full moon day of October that he came down to the world of human beings. There was a very grand descent into the human world. He came down three staircases made of gold, silver and crystal. In Myanmar to commemorate that event we have the festival of lights. It is believed that when Buddha came down to the human world it was dark. Instead of offering him food the people offered him lights. In order to commemorate that we have the festival lights on the full moon day of October. In Sri Lanka they offer lights at Vesak, the full moon day of May.

There are other stories. One is of hiding himself or hiding others by miraculous powers. Paragraph 82 몮But by whom was this miracle formerly performed? By the Blessed One. For the Blessed One so acted that when the clansman Yasa was sitting beside him, his father did not see him.몯 Yasa was a clansman who left his home during the night. He went to where the Buddha was. It was just after the Buddha had given the first sermon. He met the Buddha there and the Buddha taught him. He became a Sot?panna and also he became a monk. In the morning Yasa몭s father came to that place. He asked the Buddha 몮Did you see my son?몯 Buddha said 몮You will see him. Just sit down.몯 Then the Buddha taught him Dhamma and he became a Sot?panna. Only then did he show Yasa to him. So he hid Yasa with supernormal power so that the father did not see him. That is because if the father saw the son, he would not be able to listen to the Dhamma. He would not be able to become a Sot?panna.

몮Likewise, after traveling 2000 leagues to meet [king] Mah? Kappina and establishing him in the fruition of Non-return and his 1000 ministers in the fruition of Stream Entry, he so acted that Queen Anoj?, who had followed the king with a 1000 women attendants and was sitting nearby, did not see the king and his retinue.몯 It is the same miracle. That story you may read in Buddhist Legends, part 2, page 167. The story is given in detail there. 

몮Furthermore, this was performed by the Elder Mahinda.몯 The Elder Mahinda was the son of King Asoka who brought Buddhism to Sri Lanka. 몮He so acted on the day of his arrival in Tambapa??i Island (Sri Lanka) that the king did not see the others who had come with him.몯 He went with five persons, but when he first met the king, he did not let him see the other persons. 

몮Furthermore, all miracles of making evident are called an appearance, and all miracles of making unevident are called a vanishing. Herein, in the miracle of making evident both the supernormal power and the possessor of the supernormal power are displayed.몯 So power and person evident and power and person not evident. 몮That can be illustrated with the Twin Miracle; for in that both are displayed thus: 몬Here the Perfect One performs the Twin Miracle, which is not shared by disciples몭.몯 Only the Buddhas can do the Twin Miracle. 몮He produces a mass of fire from the upper part of his body and a shower of water from the lower part of his body몯 and so on. It is called 몬Twin Miracle몭 because both fire and water are produced from his body. Fire comes out of the upper part and water comes out of the lower part, or fire may come out of one eye and water come out of the other eye. It is called the 몬Twin Miracle몭. In footnote 15 it says 몮The only book in the Tipi?aka to mention the Twin Miracle is the Pa?isambhid?magga몭.몯 In the other books it is not mentioned, but it is mentioned again and again in the Commentaries.

몮In the case of the miracle of making unevident only the supernormal power is displayed not the possessor of the supernormal power. That can be illustrated by means of the Mahaka Sutta (in the Sa?yutta Nik?ya) and the Brahmanimantanika Sutta (in the Majjhima Nik?ya). The passage from Sa?yutta Nik?ya is given below, so we don몭t have to give you a reference number. The Brahmanimantanika is Sutta 49 of The Middle Length Sayings.

Here Venerable Mahaka did a miracle. A fire came out from the gaps in the fastenings and from the keyhole and burned hay without burning the upper robe. He put the upper robe on the hay. Then he resolved that only the hay burn and not the upper robe. 

Another one is when the Buddha met the Brahm?. The Brahm?몭s name was Baka. He thought that he could make himself vanish from the sight of all others. In that Sutta it is said that he was not able to do that. So Buddha said 몮I will do it.몯 So Buddha disappeared from all the Brahm?s. In order that all the Brahm?s know that he was there he said this verse:
     몮I saw the fear in [all kinds of] becoming.
      Including becoming that seeks non-becoming;
      And no becoming do I recommend;
      I cling to no delight therein at all.몯 
When he uttered this stanza, everybody knew that he was there, but nobody could see him. 

몮He goes unhindered through walls, through enclosures, through mountains, as though in open space: here through walls is beyond walls몯 and so on.

Here an interesting piece of information is in paragraph 89 with regard to the Elder Tipi?aka C|?a Abhaya. He had some different opinions about how to perform the direct knowledge. He said: 몮Friends, what is the use of attaining the space kasi?a [jh?na]? Does one who wants to create elephants, horses, etc., attain an elephant kasi?a jh?na or a horse kasi?a jh?na, and so on? Surely the only standard is mastery in the eight attainments, and after the preliminary work has been done on any kasi?a, it then becomes whatever he wishes.몯 But the other bhikkhus said: 몮Venerable Sir, only the space kasi?a has been given in the Text, so it should certainly be mentioned.몯 There was a little difference of opinion between that Elder and the other monks. It seems that the Elder Tipi?aka based his opinion on his experience. The others have much respect for the Texts so they said that the space kasi?a is in the Texts so it should be mentioned. Then the Text is given. 

Paragraph 91 몮What if a mountain or a tree is raised in this bhikkhu몭s way while he is traveling along after resolving; should he attain and resolve again?  - There is no harm in that. For attaining and resolving again is like taking the Dependence in the Preceptor몭s presence.몯 When you become a monk, you have to become dependent upon the Preceptor. He will teach you everything. He is like a father to you. When we are living with our preceptor, we say I regard you as my Preceptor. But sometimes we cannot live with our Preceptor for five years. We have to move to another place. Let us say I live with my Preceptor for one year and then I want to go to another place for study or practice. When I go to another place, I have to approach a teacher there, a teacher of Texts or a teacher of meditation. Then I have to regard him as my teacher. That is called 몬Dependence몭. One may say: 몮Reverend Sir, may you be my teacher. May you be one on whom I depend.몯 That is called 몬taking Dependence몭. When you live with your Preceptor, you don몭t have to take Dependence because there is the Preceptor. In the same way here when you have done the attaining and resolving, then there is no sense in doing that again. So this only monks can understand. Even though you pick up a Vinaya book and read it, there will still be something you pick up a Vinaya book and read it, there will still be something you don몭t understand. Taking dependence in the Preceptor몭s presence really means when living with the Preceptor, you don몭t have to take Dependence. You don몭t have to formally regard another person as your teacher. 

몮And because this bhikkhu has resolved 몬Let there be space몭 there will be only space there, and because of the power of his first resolve it is impossible that another mountain or tree can have sprung up meanwhile made by temperature.몯 몬Temperature몭 means utu, climatic conditions. 몮However, if it has been created by another possessor of supernormal power and created first, it prevails몯 and so on.

몮He dives in and out of the ground. Here it is rising up out of that is called 몬diving out몭 and it is sinking down into that is called 몬diving in몭.몯 He is normally an obtainer of the water kasi?a attainment. This is what a monk must do to perform this miracle. 

Paragraph 95 on unbroken water - this is walking on water. 몮Here water that one sinks into when trodden on is called 몬broken몭, the opposite is called 몬unbroken몭. But one who wants to go in this way should attain the earth kasi?a [jh?na] and emerge.몯 You have to enter into the appropriate jh?na. 몬The appropriate jh?na몭 means that you have to practice the appropriate kasi?a in order to get jh?na. For example you want to make water seem hard, unbroken, or unyielding. So you have to enter the earth kasi?a jh?na. Otherwise you will not be able to do that. 

Seated cross-legged he travels in the air. 몮Like a winged bird: like a bird furnished with wings.몯 In the P??i Texts it always says winged bird. The Commentators explain that there may be some birds which have no wings. So it is said here winged bird. That means a bird which has wings and which can fly. 몮One who wants to do this should attain the earth kasi?a and emerge몯 and so on. 몮Here is the text: 몬Seated cross-legged he travels in space like a winged bird: he is normally an obtainer of the earth kasi?a attainment몯 and so on.

Paragraph 100 몮And a bhikkhu who wants to travel in space should be an obtainer of the divine eye. Why? On the way there may be mountains, trees, etc., that are temperature-originated (that are created by climatic conditions), or jealous n?gas, supa??as, etc., may create them.몯 Supa??a is spelled with only one 몬P몭. Supa??as are garudas. Garudas are mythical birds. It is the vehicle of Vishnu, one of the gods in Hinduism. They may create them.. 몮He will need to be able to see these. But what should be done on seeing them? He should attain the basic jh?na and emerge, and then he should do the preliminary work thus 몬Let there be space몭; and resolve.몯 

몮But the Elder [Tipi?aka C|?a Abhaya] said 몬Friends, what is the use of attaining the attainment? Is not the mind concentrated? Hence any area that he has resolved thus 몮Let it be space몯 is space.몭 Though he spoke thus, nevertheless the matter should be treated as described under the miracle of going unhindered through walls몯 and so on. So this Elder did not find any favor with Venerable Buddhaghosa and other monks.

몮With his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so mighty and powerful.몯 So he could stretch out his hand and stroke the sun and moon. 몮This supernormal power is successful simply through the jh?na that is made the basis for direct knowledge; there is no special kasi?a attainment here.몯 Any jh?na will do. 

In paragraph 104 we have the words 몬clung to몭. In the Sub-Commentary it is explained that 몬clung to몭 may mean just those born of kamma and those belonging to the living body, those belonging to the bodies of living beings. 

몮Here the Elder Tipi?aka C|?a N?ga said 몬But, friends, why does what is clung to not become small and big too? When a bhikkhu comes out through a keyhole, does not what is clung to become small? And when he makes his body big, does it not become big, as in he case of the Elder Mah? Moggall?na?몯

That opinion is also rejected by Venerable Buddhaghosa. Paragraph 117 몮So it was with reference to this enlarged form created during this taming of Nandopananda that is was said 몬When he makes his body big, does it not then become big, as in the case of the Elder Mah? Moggall?na? Although this was said the bhikkhus observed 몬He enlarges only what is not clung to supported by what is clung to몭. And only this is correct here.몯 The opinion of the Elder C|?a N?ga was also not accepted by the monks.

When the monk creates a body that is bigger than his normal body, then there is enlargement. So the question here is: does he enlarge what is clung to or what is not clung to. Does he enlarge the r|pa born of kamma only or does he enlarge r|pa born of others? The answer is that he does not enlarge or he cannot enlarge what is born of kamma, but the mind-born material properties he can enlarge by the power of his mind. Along with that the material properties born of temperature can be enlarged. 

Here the reference is given to Venerable Mah? Moggall?na and a long story follows where Venerable Mah? Moggall?na tamed the royal n?ga named Nandopananda. Here the Elder Mah? Moggall?na transformed himself into a n?ga, maybe a dragon or a snake. Have you read the story? The n?ga did not like a monk flying through the air above him. He was angry. So he coiled around Mount Meru seven times and covered it with his hood. When Buddha and his disciples went there, some of the disciples said 몮Formerly when we reached this place, we could see Mount Meru. What has happened?몯 Buddha said 몮There is a n?ga. He does not like you.몯 The disciple said 몮Let me tame him. Let me tame him.몯 But the Buddha did not allow the other monks to tame him. At last Venerable Moggall?na said 몮Let me tame him.몯 The Buddha said 몮Go.몯 Buddha knew that Venerable Mah? Moggall?na alone was able to tame that serpent because he was very powerful. So in order to tame his Venerable Moggall?na turned himself into a n?ga, twice the size of that n?ga. Then he coiled himself around Nandopananda fourteen times. Then he put pressure upon him so that he was crushed between the mountain and the monk-serpent. 

So when Venerable Mah? Moggall?na did that, did he enlarge the material property born of kamma or what did he do? The answer is what? 몮He enlarges only what is not clung to supported by what is clung to. And only this is correct here.몯 So he enlarges only those born of mind or caused by mind and those caused by temperature or climatic conditions. They are supported by what is clung to. What is clung to is what is born of kamma. There is the translation of the explanation given in the Sub-Commentary as a footnote. 

At the end of footnote 20 몮It should be taken that it is the consciousness-born matter that is enlarged by the influence of the supernormal power, and the temperature-born is enlarged pari passu.몯 What is 몬pari passu몭? It is a foreign word.

Student: It might mean 몬in passing몭, not as a consequence but along with. The P??i word is 몬???몭 and that means following that. So 몬along with몭 is close to that. One can enlarge only matter born of consciousness. When consciousness-born matter is enlarged, the temperature-born matter is also enlarged, but one cannot enlarge kamma-born r|pa. Kamma-born matter is caused by kamma in the past, so nothing can be done about the kamma-born material properties. With regard to consciousness-born material properties we can do something. Even if we don몭t have jh?na, our appearance is different when we are happy from when we are sad. These are caused by citta (consciousness). So we can enlarge consciousness-born material properties.

OK. I think that is all we will do today. Next week we will begin with paragraph 119 and go on to the next chapter. We will have a description of how the world ends and how the world begins, the Buddhist genesis.

                                      S?dhu!            S?dhu!               S?dhu!




 



