Chapter 23
(Tape 47 / Ps: 1-49)

The last chapter is a description of the benefits in developing understanding. That means the benefits of meditation.

Student: I want to note something. Most people when they come want to know what they can get out of meditation. In America this should be the first chapter instead of the last chapter.

Teacher: Right. We have to wait until the end. 몬Developing understanding몭 means the practice of vipassan? meditation. What benefit can you get? Removal of the various defilements, experience of the taste of cessation, ability to attain the attainment of cessation, and achievement of worthiness to receive gifts and so on. There are four benefits to be derived from the practice of meditation, especially the practice of vipassan? meditation. I say 몬especially vipassan?몭 because it says developing understanding or wisdom. 

Paragraph 2 몮It should be understood that one of the benefits of the mundane development of understanding is the removal of the various defilements beginning with mistaken view of individuality. This starts with the Delimitation of Mentality-Materiality.몯 When you get to that stage of knowledge, when you see mind and matter clearly and nothing else, then you abandon the mistaken view of individuality, the mistaken view that there is a person, there is an individual and so on. 몮Then one of the  benefits of the supramundane development of understanding is the removal, at the Path moment, of the various defilements beginning with the fetters.몯 That is at the Path moment, you abandon defilements or fetters all together. This is the benefit of supramundane development. 

     몮With dreadful thump the thunderbolt
      Annihilates the rock.
      The fire whipped by the driving wind
      Annihilates the wood.
      The radiant orb of solar flame
      Annihilates the dark.
      Developed understanding, too,
      Annihilates inveterate
      Defilements몭 netted overgrowth,
      The source of every woe.
      This blessing in this very life
      A man himself may know.몯
So you will get this benefit in this very life. 

Paragraph 3  Next is the experience of the taste of the Noble Fruit. Now after Path follows Fruition immediately. 몮Not only the removal of the various defilements but also the experience of the taste of the Noble Fruit is a benefit of the development of understanding. For it is the fruitions of Stream Entry, etc., - the Fruits of Asceticism -, that are called the 몬Noble Fruit몭.몯 The Noble Fruits or the Four Fruitions are called 몬the Fruits of Asceticism몭 or 몬the Fruits of Monkhood몭. In P??i they are called 몬s?ma??a-phala몭. There is a discourse by that name, 몬S?ma??aphala Sutta몭, in the D?gha Nik?ya (The Collection of Long Discourses). In that discourse the Buddha explained the benefits of being a monk, something like worldly benefits. For example, he does not have to worry about his livelihood and so on. Step by step Buddha explained the benefits of the life of a monk until the Arahantship or until the person becomes an Arahant. So reaching the Fruition state is called 몬the benefit of being a monk or an ascetic몭. 몮Its taste is experienced in two ways, that is to say, in its occurrence in the cognitive series of the Path, and in its occurrence in the attainment of Fruition.몯 At the moment of enlightenment there is one thought process. So in that thought process there is the Path consciousness for one moment. And that Path consciousness moment is followed by two or three moments of Fruition. So 몬in the cognitive series of the Path몭 means in that first moment of enlightenment. After that the cognitive series or thought process stops and the consciousness falls into life-continuum. Then later on, maybe on the same day or a few days later, he wants to experience that Fruition again. Then he practices vipassan? meditation. At that time only the Fruition consciousness arises, not Path consciousness although he practices vipassan? meditation. That is because his aim is not to reach Path, but his aim is for Fruition consciousness to arise in him for some period of time. So the taste of Fruition is twofold - first at the moment of enlightenment, later on when he enters into Fruition attainment. When he enters into Fruition attainment, then this Fruition consciousness arises in his mind, say millions of times without any interruption. So he is like in jh?na state. When a person is in jh?na, he doesn몭t know any other thing. The functions of the five senses are temporarily suspended when he is in the jh?na state. So the same thing happens when a person is in a state of Fruition attainment. There are two kinds of experiencing of the taste. One is during the Path thought process and the other is at the attainment of Fruition later on. It is similar to entering into a jh?na state. 몮Of these, only its occurrence in the cognitive series of the Path has been shown.몯 That means it has been shown before in the previous chapter. 

Now the author in paragraph 4 is going to describe the Fruition attainment in detail. 몮Furthermore, when people say that the Fruit is the mere abandoning of fetters몯 - this is the opinion of some teachers. The Venerable Buddhaghosa did not approve. So the people say that Fruit is the mere abandoning of the fetters and nothing more than that. The following Sutta can be cited in order to convince them that they are wrong. So this is something like a debate or a controversy. According to these teachers, there is no separate this that is Fruit. Just the mere abandoning of fetters is called 몬Fruit몭. So for them there is no separate Fruit. Then the author of the Visuddhi Magga brings out the Text from the Pa?isambhid?magga to show that they are wrong. 몮How is it that understanding of the tranquilizing of effort is knowledge of Fruit?몯 Here 몬effort몭 means Path. So it should not be 몬tranquilizing of effort몭, but 몬tranquilizing by effort is knowledge of Fruit몭. 

몮At the moment of the Stream-Entry Path, Right View in the sense of seeing emerges from wrong view, and it emerges from the defilements and from the aggregates that occur consequent upon that [wrong view], and externally it emerges from all signs. Right View arises because of the tranquilizing of that effort.몯 Here 몬Right View몭 means 몬Fruition몭. So Fruition arises because of the tranquilizing of that effort. That is because at the moment of Fruition the effort of Path has already ceased. 몮This is the Fruit of the Path and this should be given in detail.몯 If you want to read about it in detail, you have to go to the Pa?isambhid?magga. 몮Also such passages as 몬The four Paths and the four fruits - these states have a measureless object (A 몬measureless object몭 means Nibb?na.)몭 and 몬An exalted state is a condition, as proximity condition, for a measureless state몭.몯 The first is taken from the Dhammasa~ga?? and the second is taken from the Pa??h?na. So this is a digression. 

Paragraph 5 몮However, in order to show how it occurs in the attainment of Fruition there is the following set of questions.몯 According to these questions he will explain: (1) What is Fruition attainment?, (2) Who attains it?, (3) Who do not attain it?, (4) Why do they attain it?, (5) How does its attainment come about?, (6) How is it made to last?, (7) How does the emergence from it come about?, (8) What is next to Fruition?, (9) What is Fruition next to?

The first question is: 몮What is Fruition attainment? It is absorption in the cessation in which the Noble Fruition consists.몯 I don몭t think this translation is correct. Actually what it means is: 몮It is absorption of the Noble Fruit in the cessation.몯 몬Cessation몭 here means Nibb?na. So it is the absorption of the Noble Fruition in Nibb?na. That means Noble Fruition is arising again and again taking Nibb?na as object. 몮It is absorption of the Noble Fruition in the cessation.몯 We may put the word 몬Nibb?na몭 after cessation in parenthesis. 

몮Who attains it? Who do not attain it? No ordinary men attain it. Why? Because it is beyond their reach. But all Noble Ones attain it. Why? Because it is within their reach. But those who have reached a higher Path do not attain a lower Fruition (That means they do not enter the lower Fruition attainment.) because the state of each successive Person is more tranquilized than the one below.몯 Actually it means when you reach the second stage, the first stage disappears. It is something like that. 몬They are tranquilized몭 really means 몬disappearance몭. When you get to the Second Path, then there is no First Path. 몮And those who have only reached a lower Path do not attain a higher Fruition because it is beyond their reach.몯 So if you have attained only the First Magga, you can go into First Fruition, but not the second stage of Fruition, or the third stage of Fruition and so on. Then when you have reached the second stage, you can enter into the second stage of Fruition. You cannot enter into the first stage of Fruition because it has already gone and the third and the fourth you have not yet attained. So you can enter into the second stage only. If you have reached the third stage, you can enter into the third stage of Fruition only, not the first nor the second because they have disappeared, and not the fourth because you have not yet attained it. 몮But each one attains his appropriate Fruition.몯 We may say that Sot?panna can attain only first Fruition attainment, the Once-Returner can only attain the second Fruition attainment and so on. 

Paragraph 7 몮But there are some who say that the Stream Enterer and Once-Returner do not attain it, and that only the two above them attain it.몯 This is the opinion of some teachers. 몮The reason they give is that only these two show achievement in concentration.몯 It is said that only when a person who has reached the third stage of enlightenment has he really achieved concentration. That means his concentration is really strong only when he reaches the third stage and also the fourth stage. So the Stream Enterer and Once-Returner don몭t  have much achievement in concentration. These teachers think that these two cannot enter into Fruition attainment. 몮But that is no reason, since even the ordinary man attains such mundane concentration as is within his reach.몯 So if even puthujjanas can reach the jh?nas and enter into jh?na attainment, why are the Stream Enterer and Once-Returner not able to go into their respective attainments? Therefore, their reason is no reason at all. 몮But why argue here over what is and what is not a reason? Is it not said in the Text as follows?몯 And then he brings out the Text. We will skip over it. 

Paragraph 8 몮Why do they attain it? For the purpose of abiding in bliss here and now.몯 That means in modern terms to enjoy themselves or to enjoy the bliss of Nibb?na here and now. 몮For just as a king experiences royal bliss and a deity experiences divine bliss, so too the Noble Ones think 몬We shall experience the noble supramundane bliss, and after deciding on the duration, they attain the attainment of Fruition whenever they choose.몯 

In footnote 3  몮Although they are resultant states몯 - now during the Fruition attainment, the Fruition consciousness alone arises, perhaps millions of times. Fruition consciousness is resultant consciousness. Right? With regard to other resultant consciousness do we have choice? We have no choice. It is the fruit of past kamma. So we have to just accept it. We see something good and there is eye consciousness. Right? We cannot avoid that. We have to accept it. But with regard to this resultant consciousness, Fruition consciousness, there is a choice. 몮Although they are resultant states, nevertheless the states of Fruition attainment occur in the Noble Person only when he chooses since they do not arise without the preliminary work and do so only when they are given predominance.몯 So when they want to go into Fruition attainment, they have to practice. They have to do something. They have to practice vipassan? meditation again. They do not arise without preliminary work. That is why they are said to be 몬with predominance몭. That means they belong to javanas. The Fruition consciousness has the javana function. And then there is what is called 몬predominance (adhipati)몭. When they arise, they have this predominance in them. What are the four adhipati? (1) desire (chanda), (2) consciousness (citta), (3) effort (viriya), (4) investigation (vima?s? or pa???). You can find these four in The Manual of Abhidhamma. So I think the last part of the translation is not so correct  - 몬they do so only when they are given predominance.몭 Actually when the Fruition consciousness arises, one of these four has the function of predominance. One will always have predominance. And they arise only with preliminary work. That is why, it is said in the Visuddhi Magga 몬whenever they choose몭. It is different from other types of resultant consciousness.

Paragraph 9 몮How does its attainment come about? How is it made to last?몯 That means how does it last? 몮How does the emergence from it come about? In the first place its attainment comes about for two reasons: with not bringing to mind any object other than Nibb?na, and with bringing Nibb?na to mind only, according as it is said.몯

Paragraph 10 몮Now the process of attaining it is as follows.몯 It describes how to enter into Fruition attainment. 몮A Noble Disciple who seeks the attainment of Fruition should go into solitary retreat.몯 That means he should go to a place where he has seclusion. 몮He should see formations with insight according to rise and fall and so on.몯 That means he must practice vipassan? meditation and see the rise and fall of mental and physical phenomena and then he must go up stage by stage of vipassan? knowledge. 몮When that insight has progressed [as far as conformity], then comes change-of-lineage knowledge with formations as its object. And immediately next to it consciousness becomes absorbed in cessation with the attainment of Fruition. And here it is only Fruition, not Path, that arises even in a Trainer, because his tendency is to Fruition attainment.몯 

There is footnote 4. Right? 몮Then comes change-of-lineage knowledge with formations as its object.몯 Change-of-lineage is what? The P??i is gotrabhu. In the Path process change-of-lineage takes what as object? It takes Nibb?na as object. But in this thought process it takes formations as object, not Nibb?na. 몮Why does change-of-lineage not have Nibb?na as its object here as it does when it precedes the Path?몯 In the Path thought process change-of-lineage takes Nibb?na as object. Why does it not take it here? 몮Because states belonging to Fruition are not associated with an outlet [as in the case of the Path].몯 몬Outlet몭 means 몬getting you out of sa?s?ra or out of mental and physical phenomena. Because it is the function of Magga, let us say to take you out of sa?s?ra, but it is not the function of Fruition. 몮For this is said 몬What states are an outlet? The four unincluded Paths몭.몯 So only the four Paths are called 몬outlet몭. The P??i word is 몬niyy?na몭. That means something that takes something out of something. 몮Here it is only Fruition, not Path, that arises even in a Trainer.몯 몬Trainer몭 means a person who is enlightened, but who is not yet an Arahant. So such persons are called Trainers몭. So even in a Trainer, Path consciousness does not arise because his tendency or his intention is to Fruition attainment. His aim is not to get Path consciousness but to get into Fruition attainment. That is why Path does not arise although he practices vipassan? meditation and he progresses through the successive stages of vipassan? knowledges, maybe even in one sitting. Path consciousness does not arise because his intention is not to get Path consciousness.

Paragraph 11 몮But there are those who say that when Stream Enterer embarks on insight, thinking 몬I shall attain Fruition attainment몭, he becomes a Once-Returner, and a Once-Returner a Non-Returner.몯  That is what they say. 몮They should be told 몬In that case a Non-Returner becomes an Arahant, and an Arahant a Pacceka Buddha, and a Pacceka Buddha a Buddha.몯 That is not the case. 몮For that reason, and because it is contradicted as well by the Text quoted above, none of that should be accepted. Only this should be accepted: Fruition itself, not Path, arises also in the Trainer. And if the Path he has arrived at had first jh?na his Fruition will have the first jh?na too when it arrives. If the Path has the second, so will the Fruition. And so with the other jh?nas.몯 Now when a person gets Path consciousness, his first consciousness may resemble first jh?na, or second, or third, or fourth, or fifth jh?na depending upon how many jh?na factors arise with that Path consciousness. If the Path consciousness is or belongs to first jh?na, then the Fruition consciousness must also be first jh?na fruition consciousness because it must resemble its source or its cause. If when he gets the Path, that Path has only four jh?na factors, then his Fruition consciousness in this thought process must also have four jh?na factors. So it belongs to the second jh?na and so on. This is how attainment comes about and how a person enters into Fruition attainment. 

Paragraph 12 몮It is made to last in three ways, because of the words 몬Friends, there are three conditions for the persistence of the signless mind deliverance: they are the non-bringing to mind of all signs, the bringing to mind of the signless element, and the prior volition몭. Herein, the prior volition is the predetermining of the time before attaining; for it is by determining it thus 몬I shall emerge at such a time몭 that it lasts until that time comes. This is how it is made to last.몯  So here 몬the prior volition몭 means predetermining 몬I will be in this attainment for one hour or two hours몭 and so on.

Paragraph 13 몮Emergence from it comes in two ways, because of the words 몬Friend, there are two conditions for the emergence from the signless mind deliverance: they are the bringing to mind of all signs, and the non-bringing to mind of the signless element몭. Herein, 몬of all signs몭 means the sign of materiality, sign of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. Of course, a man does not bring all those to mind at once (Not all these five become the object of his mind at once.), but this is said in order to include all. So the emergence from it should be understood in this way: emergence from the attainment of Fruition comes about in him when he brings to mind whatever is the object of the life-continuum.몯 Now a person is said to emerge from the attainment when life-continuum arises. So long as he is in attainment, then only the Fruition consciousness arises time after time after time. When at the predetermined time the life-continuum arises, he is said to have emerged from the attainment of Fruition. That is when he brings up the object of the life-continuum. You know that the life-continuum takes kamma, or the sign of kamma, or the sign of destiny as object. When life-continuum arises, the object also changes. During the Fruition attainment the object is Nibb?na. But when the life-continuum arises, the object is one of the three (kamma, or sign of kamma, or sign of destiny). 

Paragraph 14 몮What is next to Fruition? What is Fruition next to?몯 You have to understand the thought processes in order to understand this paragraph. 몮In the first case either Fruition itself is next to Fruition or the life-continuum is next to it.몯 Now during the Fruition attainment thought process, one Fruition moment follows another Fruition moment and so on. Fruition itself is next to Fruition. One Fruition follows after another. 몮Or the life-continuum is next to it.몯 That means at the end of Fruition attainment there is life-continuum. So life-continuum follows it. 몮But there is Fruition that is (a) next to the Path (following the Path immediately in the Path thought process), (b) there is that next to Fruition (That is in the Path thought process the second Fruition and the third Fruition.), [c]  there is that next to change-of-lineage (That is in the Fruition attainment thought process.), and (d) there is that next to the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception.몯 That is during the attainment of cessation which will be described later.

몮Herein, (a) it is next to the Path in the cognitive series of the Path. (That means the Path thought process.) (b) Each one that is subsequent  to a previous one is next to Fruition. [c] Each first one in the attainments of Fruition is next to change-of-lineage. And Conformity should be understood here as 몬Change-of-lineage몭 (Here actually conformity is called 몬change-of-lineage몭.); for this is said in the Pa??h?na.몯 So he cites the Pa??h?na as proof. 몮In the Arahant conformity is a condition, as proximity condition, for Fruition attainment. In Trainers, conformity is a condition, as proximity condition, for Fruition attainment.몯 So in the Pa??h?na the word 몬conformity몭 is used, not 몬change-of-lineage몭. What he describes here as change-of-lineage is actually to be taken as conformity. 몮 (d) The Fruition by means of which there is emergence from the attainment of cessation is next to the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception.몯 That is during and after the cessation attainment. We will come to that later.

Paragraph 15 몮Herein, all except the Fruition that arises in the cognitive series of the Path occur as Fruition attainment.몯 Except those that arise in the Path thought process, the other Fruition consciousnesses occur as Fruition attainment described here. 몮So whether it arises in the cognitive series of the Path or in Fruition attainment, 
      Asceticism몭s Fruit sublime
      Which tranquilizes all distress,
      Its beauty from the deathless draws,
      Of a sweet purifying bliss
      It is the fountainhead besides,
      Whose honey-sweet ambrosia
      A deathless sustenance provides.
      Now if a wise man cultivates
      His understanding, he shall know
      This peerless bliss, which is the taste
      The Noble Fruit provides; and so
      This is the reason why they call
      Experience here and now aright
      Of flavor of the Noble Fruit
      A blessing of fulfilled insight.몯
This is the benefit of vipassan? meditation.

Next we come to the attainment of cessation. 몬Attainment of cessation몭 means attainment of cessation of citta, cetasika and r|pa born-of-citta. That is called 몬attainment of cessation몭. In this attainment the activities of mind are temporarily suspended. When a person is in that attainment, there is no mental activity whatsoever. He may be like a statue for as long as he wishes, say for one day, two days, at most for human beings for seven days. During that period he may be like a statue. And then there are questions and answers. Let몭s go to the answers.

Paragraph 18 몮What is the attainment of cessation? It is the non-occurrence of consciousness and its concomitants owing to their progressive cessation.몯 When a person enters into this cessation, he has to go into the jh?nas one by one. He enters into first jh?na, and then enters into the second jh?na and so on. When he enters into the second jh?na, initial application (vitakka) ceases. And when he enters into the third jh?na, sustained application (vic?ra) ceases and so on. So they cease gradually until he reaches the fourth ar|p?vacara (formless) jh?na. 몬Attainment of cessation몭 means cessation of consciousness and its concomitants. 몬Its concomitants몭 means cetasikas.

몮Who attains it? Who do not attain it? No ordinary men, no Stream Enterers or Once-Returners, and no Non-Returners and Arahants who are bare insight workers, attain it.몯 That means beings who practice only vipassan? and become Non-Returners and Arahants cannot enter into this cessation attainment. Even if you are a Non-Returner or an Arahant, if you do not have jh?nas, then you cannot enter into this attainment. Those who practice jh?na first, then practice vipassan?, and attain to the third stage and fourth stage of enlightenment can enter into this attainment. 몮But both Non-Returners and those cankers destroyed (That means Arahants.) who are obtainers of the eight attainments (That means four r|p?vacara jh?nas and four ar|p?vacara jh?nas. They are called 몬eight attainments몭 or we may say 몬nine attainments몭 if we take the r|p?vacara to be five.), attain it몯 and so on. 몮And these qualifications are not to be found together in any persons other than Non-Returners and those whose cankers are destroyed, who are obtainers of the eight attainments.몯 The qualifications mentioned in the quotation are not to be found together in any persons other than the Non-Returners and Arahants. 몮That is why only they and no others attain it.몯 Non-Returners and Arahants who have eight jh?nas or nine jh?nas can go into this attainment of cessation. 몮But which are the two powers?몯 Actually they are digressions.

We will go to paragraph 27. 몮Mastery: there are five kinds of masteries.몯 They are also described in chapter 4. So I want you to note down chapter 4, paragraph 131 and following. You may go back and read about them.

몮Where do they attain it?몯 In which realms can they attain or can they go into this attainment? That is in paragraph 29. 몮In the five-constituent becoming.몯 Do you know the five-constituent becoming? That means where there are five aggregates. Human beings, devas, and r|p?vacara brahm?s have the five-constituent becoming. But the ar|p?vacara brahm?s do not have the five-constituent becoming; they have only four. 몮In the five-constituent becoming. Why? Because of the necessity for the succession of [all] the attainments.몯 In order to get into this attainment of cessation, one must begin with the first r|p?vacara jh?na and then the second, third, fourth, and so on. But if you are reborn as a formless brahm?, you do not have the four r|p?vacara jh?nas. So you cannot enter r|p?vacara jh?nas in the formless state. If you are reborn as a formless brahm?, you cannot enter into the r|p?vacara first, second, third, fourth and fifth jh?nas. 몮But in the four-constituent becoming (That is ar|p?vacara.) there is no arising  of the first jh?na, etc., and so it is not possible to attain it there. But some say that is because of the lack of a physical basis [for the mind there].몯 So some people say that because there is no physical basis for the mind there, that cessation attainment cannot be entered into. Actually not only the physical basis but all material properties are not found in the ar|p?vacara.

Paragraph 30 몮Why do they attain it? Being wearied by the occurrence and dissolution of formations, they attain it thinking 몬Let us dwell in bliss by being without consciousness here and now and reaching the cessation that is Nibb?na.몯 Now they are wearied by the arising and disappearing of formations. So they want to dwell in bliss by being without consciousness here and now and reaching the cessation that is Nibb?na. It is also a way of kind of enjoying themselves, that is to be without mental activities for some time. 

Paragraph 31 몮How does its attainment come about? It comes about in one who performs the preparatory tasks by striving with serenity and insight and causes the cessation of [consciousness belonging to] the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception. One who strives with serenity alone reaches the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception and remains there, while one who strives with insight alone reaches attainment of Fruition and remains there. But it is one who strives with both, and after performing the preparatory tasks, causes the cessation of [consciousness belonging to] the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception, who attains it. This is in brief.몯 So you must practice samatha and vipassan? coupled when you want to get into this attainment of cessation. If you do only samatha, you cannot get into this cessation attainment. And also if you do only vipassan?, you cannot get into this attainment. So first you enter into first jh?na. Then you emerge from this first jh?na and practice vipassan? on the first jh?na. So it goes in pairs, samatha and vipassan?, samatha and vipassan?. 

Paragraph 32 몮But the detail is this. When a bhikkhu who desires to attain cessation has finished all that has to do with his meal and has washed his hands and feet well, he sits down on a well-prepared seat in a secluded place. Having folded his legs crosswise, set his body erect, established mindfulness in front of him (That means towards the meditation object.), he attains the first jh?na, and on emerging he sees the formations in it with insight as impermanent, painful, not self.몯 

몮This insight is threefold insight that discerns formations, insight for the attainment of Fruition, and insight for the attainment of the cessation.몯 There are three kinds of vipassan?. 몮Herein, insight that discerns formations, whether sluggish or keen, is the proximate cause only for Path.몯 You practice vipassan? and it is the cause only for the Path. 몮Insight for the attainment of Fruition (That means insight practice for the attainment of Fruition.), which is only valid when keen, is similar to that for the development of Path. Insight for the attainment of cessation is only valid when it is not over-sluggish and not over-keen.몯 If it is over-sluggish, it cannot cause the cessation of the neither perception nor non-perception. And if it is over-keen, if it is too strong, too keen, then it will go on to the Fruition and not to the cessation attainment. If it is too keen, it sees dangers and others in the formations. So it leaps into Fruition attainment, not cessation attainment. So here the insight should not be over-sluggish or over-keen. 몮Therefore he sees those formations with insight that is not over-sluggish and not over-keen.몯 

Paragraph 34 몮After that, he attains the second jh?na, and on emerging he sees formations with insight in like manner. After that he attains the third jh?na몯 and so on. 몮After that he attains the base consisting of boundless consciousness (That means the second ar|p?vacara jh?na.), and on emerging he sees formations in it in like manner. Likewise he attains the base consisting of nothingness (third ar|p?vacara jh?na). On emerging he does the fourfold preparatory task.몯 So after emerging from the third ar|p?vacara jh?na, he must stop entering into jh?na. He must do these four preparatory tasks.

Now the translator got it wrong here with regard to non-damage to other몭s property. It is non-damage to the property that is not attached to him. So the first one is important. I checked it with the other translation made by a Burmese author. He was also wrong. What it really means is non-damage to the property that is not physically attached to him. Maybe they are misled by the word 몬nanabhaddha몭 in P??i. It is the opposite of the P??i word 몬ekabhaddha몭. That means 몬attached to몭, 몬attached to one몭, or 몬connected to one몭. 몬Nanabhaddha몭 means the opposite of that. So the real meaning is the property that is not physically attached to him. 

In paragraph 35 this 몮refers to 몬what the bhikkhu has about him that is not his personal property: (No. That is wrong.) a robe and bowl, or a bed and chair, or a living room, or any other kind of requisite kept by him but the property of various others.몯 No. It is other kinds of requisites that lie unattached to him. When he enters into this attainment, he has his robe. Right? He has worn his robe. If he has a bowl and puts it to his left, he may have that bowl too. They are connected or attached to his body. He may have some other sets of robes or some other things, not with him or not attached physically to him. For those things he must do something so that they do not get damaged by fire, by water, by bites of rats and so on. So the first is non-damage to the property that is not attached to him, his property, not the property of others. If it were possible for others몭 property to be like insured, we need such a monk, only one such monk. 몮It should be resolved that such property will not be damaged, will not be destroyed by fire, water, wind, thieves, rats, and so on. Here is the form of the resolve: (he makes the resolution in this way.) 몬During these seven days let this and this not be burned by fire; let it not be swept off by water; let it not be spoilt by wind; let it not be stolen by thieves; let it not be devoured by rats, and so on몭. When he has resolved in this way, they are not in danger these seven days.몯 That means for as long as he is in the attainment.

Paragraph 36 몮If he does not resolve in this way, they may be destroyed by fire, etc., as in the case of the Elder Mah?-N?ga. He went for alms into the village where his mother, a lay follower, lived. She gave him rice gruel and seated him in the sitting hall. The Elder sat down and attained cessation.몯 So he entered into the cessation attainment in the village, in the sitting hall. 몮while he was sitting there, the hall caught fire. The other bhikkhus each picked up their seats and fled. The villagers gathered together, and seeing the Elder, they said 몬What a lazy monk!몭 The fire burned the grass thatch, the bamboos and timbers, and it encircled the Elder.몯 The fire did not burn the Elder, but everything else was burned. 몮People brought water and put it out. They removed the ashes, did the repairs (that means like making the ground smooth again and so on.), scattered flowers, and then stood respectfully waiting. The Elder emerged at the time he had determined. Seeing them, he said 몬I am discovered!몭 (Because he didn몭t want the people to know that he was an An?g?mi or an Arahant.) And he rose up into the air and went to Piya~gu Island.몯 So 몮This is no-damage to property (not 몬others몭 property몭) that is not attached to him.몯

Paragraph 37 몮There is no special resolving to be done for what is his own personal property.몯 That means what is attached to his body, not 몬his own personal property몭. For the robe he is wearing, he doesn몭t have to bother. He doesn몭t have to worry about that. He doesn몭t have to make a resolution for the safety of the robe he is wearing. It will be taken care of. There is no special resolving to be done for what is attached to his body such as the inner and outer robes or the seat he is sitting on. 몮He protects all that by means of the attainment itself, like those of the Venerable Sa?j?va. And this is said 몬There was success by intervention of concentration in the Venerable Sa?j?va. There was success by intervention of concentration in the Venerable S?riputta.몯 So you go back to chapter 12, paragraph 30. When you see that, you will know. Venerable Sa?j?va was in attainment and people didn몭t know that he was a monk and so the people put fuel and wood on him and then set it on fire. But he was not burned because he was in attainment. 

Paragraph 38 몮The Community몭s (or Sa~gha몭s) waiting is the Community몭s (Sa~gha몭s) expecting; the meaning is: till this bhikkhu comes there is no carrying out of acts of the Community (Sa~gha).몯 When the Sa~gha does what we call 몬the acts of Sa~gha몭, then all monks must assemble to a place. If one monk is absent or away from the assembled monks, then that act becomes invalid. So he must come to where the other monks are assembled. But when he is in attainment, he may not be able to come. So he must do something about that. 몮And here it is not the actual Community몭s waiting that is the preparatory task, but the adverting to the waiting.몯 That means thinking of the waiting. 몮So it should be adverted to in this way 몬While I am sitting for seven days in the attainment of cessation, if the Community wants to enact a resolution, etc., I shall emerge before any bhikkhu comes to summon me몭.몯 So if the Sa~gha expects him, then he will emerge from the attainment. He must resolve like that. 

Paragraph 39 몮But if he does not do so, then perhaps the Community assembles, and not seeing him, it is asked 몬Where is the bhikkhu?몯 and so on. If he does not make the resolution before entering the attainment, then he will not emerge from it automatically. But he will emerge from it when a monk goes to him and just says to him 몬You are expected by the Sa~gha몭. Then he will surely emerge from the attainment. 

Paragraph 40 Then the third one is the Master몭s summons. 몬Master몭 means the Buddha. If Buddha wants him to come, then he must go to the Buddha and so on. It is similar to Community몭s waiting. 

Paragraph 42 The fourth one is the limit of life duration. So he must think of how long he will live before he enters into this attainment. At least he must know that he is going to live more than seven days. Otherwise there will be a dilemma. That is because during the attainment death cannot come. So he must surely make this preparatory task although the others can be ignored. So he should attain only after adverting to that. 몮For it is said that while it may be permissible to omit adverting to others (the other three), this however must be adverted to.몯 

몮Now when he has thus the base consisting of nothingness and done this preparatory task, he then attains the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception. Then after one, or two, turns of consciousness have passed (That means one or two moments of the fourth ar|p?vacara jh?na.), he becomes without consciousness.몯 So consciousness ceases at that moment. He achieves cessation. There are no cittas, no cetasikas, no r|pa-born-citta. 몮But why do consciousnesses not go on occurring in him after the two consciousnesses? Because the effort is directed to cessation.몯 His effort is directed to cessation, so there is cessation of consciousness. 몮For the bhikkhu몭s mounting through the eight attainments, coupling together the states of serenity and insight is directed to successive cessation, not to attaining the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception. So it is because the effort is directed to cessation that o more than two consciousnesses occur.몯 So there are not many moments of consciousness; only two consciousnesses occur.

Paragraph 44 몮But if a bhikkhu emerges from the base consisting of nothingness without having done this preparatory task and then attains the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception, he is unable to become without consciousness: he returns to the base consisting of nothingness and settles down there.몯 So he will not be able to make it disappear; he will go back to the third one. 

Paragraph 48 몮How is it made to last? It lasts as long as the time predetermined for its duration, unless interrupted meanwhile by the exhaustion of the life span, by the waiting of the Community, or by the Master몭s summons.몯

Paragraph 49 몮How does the emergence from it come about? The emergence comes about in two ways thus: by means of the Fruition of non-return in the case of the Non-Returner, or by means of the Fruition of Arahantship in the case of the Arahant.몯
                                         TAPE ENDS

                                      S?dhu!               S?dhu!            S?dhu!

We offer this transcription of a Dhamma class with Venerable U S?l?nanda with the hope that it will be beneficial for your understanding of the Buddha몭s teachings. This transcription has not been edited. It is the record of spontaneous exchanges between the teacher and students. Therefore it is possible that there are some errors. We are certain that such errors are infrequent and minimal. Say?daw is a meticulous and careful teacher and offers these teaching in this manner out of compassion for those people interested in the serious study and practice of meditation and Buddhism.

