Chapter 1
(Tape 1 / Ps: 1-22)
?
   The name of the original book is Visuddhi  Magga which means the path to purification or the way to purification or purity. ．Magga・ means the path. ．Visuddhi・ means purification or purity.
   This book was written in P??i language. Actually P??i was not the name of the language. It was the name of a category of P??i literature which are called ．Texts・. The word ．P??i・ is used in contradistinction from the A??hakath?s (Commentaries) and Tik?s (Sub-Commentaries). The language came to be known as P??i at a later date. The word ．P??i・ can mean the Texts and also the language in which the texts are recorded. The Texts are comprised of Vinaya, Sutta and Abhidhamma. They are called ．P??i・. The Commentaries are called ．A??hakath?s・ and the Sub-Commentaries are called ．Tik?s・.
   This book belongs to the category of Commentaries, one of the categories in P??i literature. First there were Texts. Then there were Commentaries. Later there were commentaries on the commentaries which are called ．Sub-Commentaries・.
   The author of this book was the Venerable Buddhaghosa. The name given is Bhadant?cariya Buddhaghosa. Actually his personal name was Buddhaghosa. The word in front is Bhadant?cariya. ．Bhadant?・ means venerable and ．?cariya・  means teacher. So the meaning of the name is the venerable teacher Buddhaghosa. Buddhaghosa was his personal name. ．Buddha・ means the Buddha and ．Ghosa・ means voice. So ．Buddhaghosa・ means the voice of the Buddha.
   He wrote or edited many Commentaries. The Visuddhi Magga is not the only Commentary he wrote. It seems that this book was written first and then the other Commentaries followed later. We do not know if they were published one after the other or more or less at the same time. The other Commentaries always refer to the Visuddhi Magga when they have something to say in detail. So we can assume that this book was written first and then the other Commentaries came later.
   Although this book is called a ．Commentary・, it is not a Commentary on a particular Sutta, or a particular collection of Suttas, or a particular Pi?aka. It is called a ．common Commentary of the Texts・. That means it quotes copiously from the Texts and then it explains these Texts in great detail. So it is not a Commentary of any particular Sutta, or collection of Suttas, or Pi?aka. It is a common Commentary to all Texts.
   The author of this book was Venerable Buddhaghosa. He lived in the fifth century AD. He was about 900 years removed from the Buddha. 
   The Commentaries he wrote were not his own creation. They were not originally his work because the Commentaries existed during the time of the Buddha. These Commentaries were carried down from generation to generation by word of mouth. Later they were written down and taken to Sri Lanka. Some were translated into Sinhalese. Later in the fifth century the Venerable Buddhaghosa, who was a native of India, went to Sri Lanka and worked with the monks at the great monastery in Anur?dhapura which was a stronghold of Therav?da Buddhism. 
   He got permission to write these Commentaries and so he wrote them for the Sa~gha there. All were accepted as authentic exigical literature of the Texts or P??i. 
   There is a Commentary to this Commentary. We call it a ．Sub-Commentary・. Its name is Paramatthama?j|s?. It is mentioned in the introduction of this book. That Sub-Commentary was written by a teacher or a monk called Venerable Dhammap?la. I am not sure to what age he belonged, maybe the seventh century.
      The purpose in writing this book, as the name implies, was to show people the way to purity, the way to purification. ．The way to purification・ means purification of mind from mental impurities or defilements. So in fact it is a book on meditation. It is a handbook of meditation written by a monk for monks.
   When he wrote this book, he assumed that the readers had a knowledge of Abhidhamma. So it is not so easy in some places to understand this book without a knowledge of Abhidhamma.
   The purpose in writing this book was just to help those who wanted to practice meditation. The different types of meditation are explained in this book. In some cases they are given in meticulous detail. 
   When he wrote this book, he followed the structure hinted at by the Buddha in one of the Suttas. The author picked one stanza from the Sutta Pi?aka in the Sa?yutta Nik?ya. That stanza is given at the beginning of the book. Following that stanza and following let us say the Buddha・s blueprint for spiritual development, he structured this book. 
   There are three stages in Buddha・s plan for spiritual development. The first is s?la. The second is sam?dhi. The third is pa???. The first is called ．virtue・, following this translation. The second is concentration. The third is understanding. S?la or virtue is the foundation on which sam?dhi (concentration) and pa??? (wisdom) are built. Without s?la there can be no concentration. And without concentration there can be no pa??? or penetration into the nature of things. These three stages of development are to be practiced one after the other. The author, the Venerable Buddhaghosa, followed this structure.
 S?la or virtue is described in the first two chapters. The first chapter deals with s?la. The second chapter deals with what we call ．ascetic practices・. Ascetic practices are for the further purification of s?la or virtue.
   From chapter three through chapter thirteen sam?dhi or concentration is explained. In these chapters the forty subjects of tranquillity meditation are explained in detail. The last two chapters in this part give the benefits of tranquillity or serenity meditation.
   From chapter fourteen through chapter 23 pa??? or wisdom is described. There are 23 chapters in the book. In chapters 14-17 a theoretical knowledge of the aggregates, bases, faculties, roots and so on is explained. The description of vipassan? meditation begins with chapter 18 going through chapter 22. The last chapter 23 explains the benefits of mental culture or vipassan?. 
   There are two editions of this book in P??i written in Roman script. One was published by the P??i Text Society of London. The other was published by Harvard University. The edition of PTS was published in 1921. It is older than all of us here. The Harvard edition was published in 1950.
   There are two English translations. The first was done by a Burmese layman named Pe Maung Tin who was also the editor of the first Commentary of the Abhidhamma, the A??has?lin?. In English it is called ．The Expositor・. Pe Maung Tin・s translation came first. It was published in 1923. The second translation called ．The Path of Purification・ was done by Venerable N??amoli. He was an English man who became a monk after the war. He lived all his years as a monk in Sri Lanka. When he was doing this translation, I was in Sri Lanka. When it came out in 1956, I was there. So there are two English translations. Many people think this is the better translation, but I don・t know. We will have to see.
   We are going to cover only three chapters in eight weeks. Maybe we will take up the other chapters next year. In this part there are altogether only 120 pages. So we will have to read about 15 pages each week. That means you will have to read three pages a day. I want you to really read the book before you come to the class because I cannot go into detail reading from the beginning to the end. We will not be able to finish 15 pages in an hour because I will have to explain some of the difficult points in this book. So we will do three chapters in eight weeks. 
   The first chapter deals with virtue or s?la. Unfortunately it deals only with the s?la of monks. This book was written for monks. So the first chapter deals exclusively with the s?la for monks. The purification of s?la is very much emphasized in this chapter.
   There is a saying in Burma that if  a monk studies Visuddhi Magga, after he has studied it, he will either decide to disrobe or he will go into the forest and practice meditation. This is because s?la has to be kept very pure and it is difficult to keep all these precepts pure. So some may become disillusioned or become afraid of being impure and may disrobe. Or if you are a real good monk, then you will keep sila and you will go to the forest and practice meditation.
Student: Or study it?
Teacher: Yes. Actually all monks study because if you are interested in meditation you have to study it. The instructions for meditation are given in detail in this book. Everybody or every monk who wants to practice meditation has to have at least some acquaintance with this book, even though they may not have read through the entire book. Relying on their teachers and reading some portions of the book, they practice meditation. This is the handbook of meditation teachers as well as the students of meditation.
   The first chapter deals with the virtue of monks. At first the author gives us a stanza from the Sa?yutta Nik?ya. Based on this stanza he planned this book. He wrote on the basis of this stanza which describes s?la, sam?dhi and pa???. ：When a wise man, established well in virtue, develops consciousness and understanding, then as a bhikkhu ardent and sagacious, he succeeds in disentangling this tangle.； This is the stanza put at the beginning of this book.
   This stanza was in response to a question asked by a deity. The deity asked the Buddha: ：The inner tangle and the outer tangle, this generation is entangled in a tangle. So I ask of Gotama this question, who succeeds in disentangling this tangle?；
   The explanation of this stanza was given below. When you read this book, you will at least have a glimpse of how the P??i Commentaries are written. There are word explanations and then some comments on them. When you see words in italics, these are the words that appear in the original P??i Text.
   ：Tangle is a term for the network of craving.； Actually craving is compared to a tangle here. When we have craving, we are entangled in different things. 
   The deity asked how this tangle could be disentangled. The Buddha・s answer was that first you were to be well established in virtue, in moral conduct, in sila. Then you develop consciousness. Here ．consciousness・ really means sam?dhi. Sam?dhi is described as consciousness here. Then you develop understanding or pa???.
   ：Then as a bhikkhu ardent and sagacious, he succeeds in disentangling this tangle.； That means you develop sam?dhi. You practice samatha meditation. Then you develop understanding. That is you practice vipassan? meditation. If you practice vipassan? meditation, you will succeed in disentangling this tangle. You will succeed in destroying this craving. When craving is destroyed, when craving is eradicated, there will be no tangle of craving. So Buddha taught this deity to first be well established in virtue. Then he was told to practice meditation or sam?dhi and then he was told to develop pa??? or wisdom.
   Vipassan? and pa??? are synonymous. Sam?dhi and here citta (consciousness) are synonymous. Sam?dhi and samatha are synonymous. Then the author describes how he is going to write this book.
   ：Herein, purification should be understood as Nibb?na.・ ．Purification・ really means Nibb?na. ：Herein, purification should be understood as Nibb?na, which being devoid of all stains is utterly pure. The Path of Purification is the path to that purification; it is the means of approach that is called the ．path・.；
   There may be some places where I would like to make corrections or suggest a better translation. In paragraph 5 - ：The Path of Purification is the path to that purification; it is the means of approach.； I think we should say ．the means of attainment that is called the path・. The P??i word ．adhigama・ is used in the sense of attainment, reaching. It is better to say ．the means of attainment that is called the path・.
   ：The meaning is , I shall expound the path of purification. That path of purification is taught sometimes by insight alone (that is by vipassan? alone) according as it is said.； Always the ancient authors are very conscious that whatever they said must have proof of authenticity. So Venerable Buddhaghosa always refers to statements in the Texts or the P??i books. Here the author takes a statement from the Suttas as a proof of authenticity.
   ：Formations are all impermanent; when one sees this with understanding and turns away from what is ill, that is the path to purity.； Vipassan? is meant. Sometimes the path of purification is taught by insight or vipassan? only. 
   ：And in some instances by jh?na and understanding according as it is said:； - here jhana means tranquillity meditation. ．Understanding・ means vipassan? meditation. Sometimes the path is taught by samatha and vipassan? meditation.
   ：He is near unto Nibb?na in whom are jh?na and understanding；. This is a quote from the Dhammapada. Once again here ．jh?na・ means samatha meditation. This will be described in great detail in the coming chapters.
   ：And in some instances by deeds (kamma) etc. according as it is said: ．by deeds, vision and righteousness, by virtue the most sublime life by these are mortals purified, and not by lineage and wealth・.； In this stanza kamma, vision, righteousness, virtue and life sublime are described as a way to purification. When the Buddha taught, he taught in various ways depending upon the capabilities of his listeners.
   ：And in some instances by virtue etc., according as it is said: ．he who is possessed of constant virtue, who has understanding, and is concentrated, who is strenuous (he who is energetic or he who puts forth effort) and diligent as well will cross the flood so difficult to cross・.；
   ：And in some instances by the foundations of mindfulness (sometimes the path is described by the foundations of mindfulness) etc., according as it is said: ．Bhikkhus, this path is the only way for the 
 purification of beings・.； 
   ：Similarly in the case of right effort and so on； - sometimes by way of right effort and sometimes by way of faculties and others this path is described.
   ：But in the answer to this question it is taught by virtue and the other two.； Here in this stanza, the stanza mentioned at the beginning of the book, the path is described or taught by virtue, concentration and wisdom.
   Then the detailed explanation of the stanza is given in paragraph 7 - ：established well in virtue, a man, wise, develops consciousness and understanding； and so on. Now let us see the explanation of the word ．wise・. ：Wise: possessing the kind of understanding that is born of kamma by means of a rebirth-linking with triple root-cause.； You are familiar with the roots, lobha, dosa, moha and their opposites alobha, adosa, and amoha. A relinking consciousness may be accompanied by two roots (alobha and adosa) or by three roots (alobha, adosa and amoha). When it is accompanied by three roots, a person is called a ．three root person・. Only these three root persons can become enlightened in that particular life. If our relinking consciousness is only accompanied by two roots, non-attachment and non-hatred, we cannot hope to get enlightenment in this life. A ．wise man・ means a person that is born with three roots. The relinking consciousness has all three roots. Understanding or wisdom (amoha) is included in his relinking consciousness.
Student: Lobha is hatred?
Teacher: Lobha is attachment. Dosa is hatred. Moha is delusion or ignorance. The opposites of these three are alobha, adosa and amoha. Only two or three of these last three roots accompany the relinking consciousness.
   If you remember the diagram of death and relinking thought process, you will remember the relinking consciousness, Pa?isandhi. That consciousness is accompanied by some mental factors. Among these mental factors there may be all three good roots or there may be two roots. If a person is reborn with the relinking consciousness accompanied by three roots, he is said to be ．wise・ here. 
   ：Develops consciousness and understanding: develops both concentration and insight.； That means one practices both samatha and vipassan? meditation. 
   ：Sagacious: it is understanding that is called ．sagacity・; possessing that is the meaning. This word shows protective understanding.； Actually here ．understanding・ means some kind of clear comprehension. Clear comprehension of what is beneficial and clear comprehension of what is suitable is called ．understanding・ here. Rather than saying ．protective understanding・ we should say ．understanding engaged in keeping meditation・. That means when you practice meditation, you have to know what is beneficial and what is not and what is suitable and what is not. You have to keep this wisdom or understanding with you always when you practice meditation. That is what is meant here.
   ：He sees fear (bhaya? ikkhati) in the round of rebirths, thus he is a bhikkhu.； The word ．bhikkhu・ is translated as monk. Most of the Buddha・s suttas are taught to monks. So you find the Buddha addressing monks very often. In one of the Suttas, the Sutta on the foundations of mindfulness, the Commentary explained that anybody who practices meditation and who sees danger in existence can be called a ．bhikkhu・, a ．monk・. Bhikkhu is derived from ．bhi・ and ．ikkhu・. ．Bhi・ here means fear or danger. ．Ikkhu・ means to see. So the meaning is one who sees danger in existence can be called a ．bhikkhu・. In this case not only ordained monks is meant, but anyone who sees danger in existence or in becoming can be called a ．bhikkhu・. Such a person will be able to cut this tangle and become an Arahant. 
   By this stanza the Buddha shows many things - the three trainings, dispensation that is good in three ways and so on. They are all explained later. 
   The dispensation of the Buddha is said to be good in the beginning, good in the middle and good in the end. Why is it good in the beginning? ：Because of the passage which says what is the beginning of profitable things?； ．Profitable things・ here means wholesome (kusala). Different authors have different translations for the P??i word ．kusala・. I prefer the word ．wholesome・. The author here preferred profitable. ．Profitable things・ means wholesome things.
   ：The not doing of any evil, virtue is the beginning of the dispensation.； So s?la is the beginning of Buddha・s dispensation or Buddha・s religion.
   ：And that is good because it brings about special qualities of non-remorse and so on.； S?la is conducive to feelings of non-remorse because when one・s moral conduct is pure, one does not suffer from guilt feelings or remorse. The benefit of pure s?la, pure virtue is non-remorse. 
   What is meant by ．and so on・? One leads to another. In paragraph 32 we read about this. ：Discipline is for the purpose of restraint, restraint is for the purpose of non-remorse.； When we have restraint, we do not have regrets; we are free from regrets. 
   ：Non-remorse is for the purpose of gladdening.； When there is non-remorse, we are glad. ：Gladdening is for the purpose of happiness.；  Gladdening is a weaker form of happiness and happiness is a greater form of happiness. 
   This happiness leads to tranquillity. Only when there is happiness, both happiness of the mind (．Happiness・ also means comfort.) and comfort of the body, does tranquillity arise. 
   ：Tranquillity is for the purpose of bliss (sukha).； ．Sukha・ is translated as bliss here. Tranquillity is passadhi. You will come across these words in the 52 cetasikas - tranquillity of mental body and tranquillity of citta. 
   ：Tranquillity is for the purpose of bliss and bliss is for the purpose of concentration; concentration is for the purpose of correct knowledge and vision.； For the purpose of concentration we need bliss. ．Bliss・ here means comfort or peacefulness. When there is no peacefulness, we cannot get concentration. So it leads ultimately, step by step, to liberation from all suffering, to the extinction of all suffering and to the extinction of all mental defilements. 
   Concentration is the middle of Buddha・s dispensation. ：Because of the passage beginning ．Entering upon the profitable・ - here also the usual translation is cultivating what is wholesome, what is good. Do you remember a stanza that I talked about in the first or second Abhidhamma lecture? There is a stanza or verse in the Dhammapada which describes in a very brief way the teachings of the Buddhas. It says: ：Not to do evil, to cultivate good and to purify one・s mind - this is the teachings of the Buddhas.； The author is referring to that stanza.
   ：Entering upon the profitable； means cultivating what is wholesome. It is the middle of the dispensation because it means concentration.
   ：That is good because it brings about special qualities of supernormal powers and so on.； When you have concentration, you can get jh?nas and also supernormal powers. 
   ：Its goodness is the end is shown by understanding.； Understanding, knowledge or wisdom is the highest stage. ：Because of the passage ．The purifying of one・s own mind - this is the buddha・s dispensation・ and because understanding is its culmination, understanding is the end of the dispensation.； ．Understanding・ here means penetration of the Four Noble Truths. 
   Now paragraph 11 - ：Likewise the necessary conditions for the triple clear-vision is shown by virtue.； Do you know the triple clear-vision? S?la is the necessary condition for the triple clear-vision. The triple clear-vision is the recollection of past lives, the knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings and the destruction of mental defilements. These three are called the ．triple clear-vision・.                                                                                                  
Actually they are supernormal knowledge. They belong to supernormal knowledge.
   ：The necessary condition for the six kinds of direct-knowledge is shown by concentration.； The six kinds of direct-knowledge are shown in the footnote. Three of them are the triple clear-vision. They are knowledge of supernormal power (that means one knows how to perform some miracles), the divine ear, penetration of mind (that means reading the minds of others), recollection of past lives, the knowledge of passing away and reappearance of beings, and the knowledge of the destruction of cankers.
   ：The necessary condition for the categories of discrimination is shown by understanding.； It is very difficult to understand this phrase, ：the categories of discrimination；. What do you understand by that? Actually it is a kind of understanding. Let us look at the footnote. It is the understanding of meaning, understanding of law (．Law・ means Dhamma.), understanding of language and understanding of  wisdom or intelligence. These four are called ．discriminative knowledge in the Pa?isambhid?. That means the penetrative knowledge of these four. 
   The first one is meaning. Only meaning is given in the footnotes. In fact it is the knowledge that something arises out of something. Something arises depending upon some other thing. It is a result or an effect. Instead of law we can interpret it to mean cause and also the words of his teaching. Language is just language. Here with Therav?da interpretation it means P??i language. 
   You know everybody wants their language to be the original language of humanity. Therefore those who are brought up in pali tradition like to think that pali is the original language. They like to think that P??i was the language used by the people who appeared in the world in the beginning. People brought up in the Sanskrit tradition say that Sanskrit was the original language of human beings. So here ．language・ means P??i language. ．Intelligence・ just means understanding or wisdom. 
   So many things are shown by just this one verse. We are not sure that Buddha meant all of this. The commentators are very fond of explaining in many ways a single teaching or single verse of the Buddha.
   In paragraph 12 ：Likewise the means for surmounting the states of loss is shown by virtue.； ．The states of loss・  means the four states of misery or woe, the four ap?yas (the animal kingdom, hell, angry ghosts and another kind of ghost).
   ：The means for surmounting the element of sense desires by concentration...； - do you know the element of sense desire? What do you understand by that? ．Element of sense desires・ here means the world of sense desires, kamavacara loka. The Pali word used is ．dhatu・. Dhatu is normally translated as element. Therefore the author translated it as element of sense desires, but that doesn・t convey the intended meaning. In Pali we have kamadhatu, rupadhatu, and arupadhatu. ．Kamadhatu・ means the realms of sense desires. That is the human world, the six lower celestial worlds and the four states of woe. So here I think we should say the world of sense desire. That makes more sense. 
Student: Venerable U S?l?nanda for some of the people who do not have books I would like to read the question and the answer again. The question that the Commentary is answering is: ：The inner tangle and the outer tangle, this generation is entangled in a tangle. And so I ask of Gotama this question: who succeeds in disentangling this tangle?； The answer was: ：When a wise man, established well in virtue, develops consciousness and understanding, then as a bhikkhu ardent and sagacious, he succeeds in disentangling this tangle.；
Teacher: Next time I think it will be better when you have read the passages. Today it is something that you are not familiar with. You may be lost in some places. 
   This is just the introductory talk before the author really explains what virtue is, what the meaning of s?la is and so on. He proceeds in this manner. First he puts questions. Then he gives answers to these questions one by one.  
   The first question that he asks is what is virtue, what is s?la? The answer is: ：It is a stage beginning with volition present in one who abstains from killing living beings etc.； When we abstain from killing living beings, abstain from stealing and so on, consciousness arises in our minds. What kind of consciousness arises? Wholesome or unwholesome? Wholesome. Together with that wholesome consciousness mental states or mental factors arise. Among these mental factors there is one that is called ．volition・, ．cetan?・. So the question is: what is virtue? The answer is: cetan? is virtue. When we say ．virtue・, we mean cetan?, cetan? which accompanies the type of consciousness which arises in our minds when we abstain from killing, stealing and so on.
   ：For it is said in the Pa?isambhid?； - that is the name of a book. In our countries it is included in the Texts. Actually they are something like an appendix to the Tipi?ika. The Pa?isambhid? was not taught by the Buddha. It was taught by the Venerable S?riputta. The commentator, the Venerable Buddhaghosa, had much respect for this book, the Pa?isambhid?. He quotes from this book very often throughout the Visuddhi Magga.
   ：For this is said in the Pa?isambhid?: ．What is virtue? There is virtue as volition, virtue as consciousness-concomitant, virtue as restraint, virtue as non-transgression.； So in that book it is said that volition is virtue, mental factors are virtue, restraint is virtue, and non-transgression is virtue. Virtue can mean any of these things. 
   ．Consciousness-concomitant・ means what according to our understanding? Cetasikas. Sometimes cetasikas are called ．virtue・. We have abstinences among the 52 cetasikas. Do you remember that? They are right speech, right action and right livelihood. They are called ．restraint・ here. There may be others too. Non-transgression is also called ．virtue・. You know volition. Volition arises with consciousness when we abstain from something.
   ：Virtue as consciousness-concomitant is the abstinence in one who abstains from killing living beings and so on.； Here ．consciousness-concomitant・ means the three abstinences. The three abstinences are called ．virtue・. Sometimes cetan? is called ．virtue・ and sometimes the three abstinences are called ．virtue・. 
   ：Furthermore, virtue as volition is the seven volitions (that accompany the first seven) of the (ten) courses of action (kamma) in one who abandons the killing of living beings and so on.； There are what we call ．ten courses of action・. That means abstaining from killing, abstaining from stealing, abstaining from sexual misconduct, abstaining from lying, from backbiting, from harsh speech and from talking nonsense. There are these seven and we will come to the other three later. When the author said ．seven・, he meant these. There are three kinds of misconduct by body and four kinds of misconduct by speech. So they are seven. 
   ：Virtue as consciousness-concomitant is the three remaining states consisting of non-covetousness, non-ill-will and right view.； These three plus the seven mentioned above are called the ．ten courses of wholesome action (kusala). 
   ：Virtue as restraint should be understood here as restraint in five ways.； There are five kinds of restraint mentioned in the Suttas. The first is restraint by rules of the community. ．Rules of the community・ really means the rules for monks. There are 227 rules for monks. When a monk keeps these rules, then he has restraint in  his bodily actions and in his verbal actions or speech.
   There is restraint by mindfulness. Mindfulness is sometimes called ．restraint・. There is restraint by knowledge, restraint by patience and restraint by energy.
   ：Herein restraint by P??imokkha is this: ．He is furnished, fully furnished, with this P??imokkha restraint・. Restraint by mindfulness is this: ．・He guards the eye faculty, enters upon restraint of the eye faculty・.； That is when you see something, you try to just see it and not go to liking it or disliking it. If you can just see it and avoid the arising of the unwholesome mental states, you are said to be restraining the eye faculty. In fact restraining the eye faculty does not mean closing your eyes or not looking at things. You look at things that you see, but you do not get akusala from seeing them. This is restraint in the eye. In order not to be attached to things that you see or not to be upset by things that you see, you have to keep mindfulness. That is why mindfulness is called 'restraint' ・ here.
   ：Restraint by knowledge is this: ．The currents in the world that flow Ajita,・ said the Blessed One, ．are stemmed by means of mindfulness・.； The ．currents・ here means akusala. The currents of akusala are stemmed by mindfulness. When there is mindfulness, they cannot arise. They are stopped.
   ：Restraint of currents I proclaim, by understanding they are dammed.； By understanding they are totally subdued or suppressed. So here understanding is called ．restraint・. 
   ：And use of requisites is here combined with this.； That means the use of requisites is also called ．restraint・ here. ．Use of requisites・ refers to monks. Monks have to use requisites with reflection and understanding. That means for example whenever I put on this robe I have to say to myself or I have to reflect: ：I use this robe just to ward off cold, just to ward off heat, to ward off insect bites・ and so on. When we eat something also, we say: ：I eat not to take pride in my strength, not to make myself beautiful, but I eat this just to be able to practice buddha・s teachings.； When we use the Vih?ra (the dwelling place), we have to reflect that it is used for protection from heat, cold and so on. And when we take medicine, we reflect that we take medicine just to get rid of disease and so on. Monks have to do this whenever they make use of these four requisites. If there is no understanding or no knowledge, we cannot do it. Therefore the use of requisites is called ．restraint by knowledge・. 
   ：What is called restraint by patience? He is one who bears cold and heat.； We bear cold. We are patient with cold. We are patient with heat. We are patient with thirst. We are patient with hunger. That is called ．restraint by patience・. Actually patience itself is restraint here. 
   ：What is called restraint by energy? He does not endure a thought of sense desires when it arises.； That means you have to make effort or you have to have energy not to endure such thoughts. As soon as such thoughts arise in your mind, you just stop them. That is called here ．restraint by energy・ because if you don・t have energy, you cannot do that. You have to make effort to stop as soon as these thoughts arise in your mind.
   ：Purification of livelihood is here combined with this.； Purification of livelihood is also meant for monks. Monks must have a very pure livelihood. Monks must not work to earn money. Monks must not tell fortunes or read palms in order to get something from people. If we do that, then our livelihood is said to be impure. In order to have pure livelihood what must we do? We must go out for alms. We must make effort. We must have energy. That is the only purity of livelihood for monks. Monks must not work for money. Monks must not ask people to bring food to them. They must go out for alms.
   I am in a very different country. We monks cannot go out for alms. So now we have to ask people to bring food to the monastery. ．Purification of livelihood・ means you must depend upon yourself. In the books it says that you must rely on your foot muscles. You walk and collect food from house to house and return to the monastery. 
   ：So this fivefold restraint, and the abstinence, in clansmen who dread evil, from any chance of transgression met with, should all be understood to be ．virtue as restraint・.；
   ：Virtue as non-transgression (that is not breaking the rules) is the non-transgression by body or speech, of precepts of virtue that have been undertaken.； When you take the precepts, you keep them. You do not break them. The precepts here are of body and of speech. We must understand that sila has to do with bodily actions and with verbal actions, not thoughts.  You may think of killing a living being, but as long as you do not kill it, you are not breaking that rule. You may think of telling a lie to another person, but if you do not tell a lie, you are not breaking that rule. Therefore s?la is to control the bodily and verbal actions of a person.
Student: We have a precept which is not to harbor ill-will. How does that work?
Teacher: It is included in sam?dhi in Therav?da Buddhism. Sam?dhi is for control of mind, for control of thought. Just thinking something bad does not constitute breaking of rules. These rules control the actions of the body and the actions of speech. Although it is not good to have unwholesome thoughts, still if you do not do with your body or by your speech, you are still keeping these rules. In Therav?da Buddhism s?la is for bodily and verbal actions. Sam?dhi is for control of mind. Pa??? is for eradication of mental defilements. 
   Although it is not a precept in Therav?da Buddhism, non-ill-will is the same as ：do not harbor thoughts of hatred or ill-will・. That is included in the three courses of action of mind - non-covetousness, non-ill-will and right view. They are included in kamma of mind. We have three kinds of kamma - bodily kamma, verbal kamma and mental kamma.
   What is the meaning of the word ．s?la・? It may not be interesting to those who are not interested in P??i. The word ．s?la・ is explained here as meaning composing or upholding. What is this ．composing・? ：It is either a coordinating, meaning non-inconsistency of bodily actions etc. due to virtuousness.； ．Non-inconsistency・ really means non-scattering of one・s actions. That means if we do bad actions, then our actions are said to be scattered, non-coordinated. I think ．scattered・ is better than ．inconsistency・. ．Consistence・ means that it must not be different from others or something like that. If you are consistent, it means that you do this thing always. It can be a bad habit. Here it means that your actions are not scattered when you have sila. 
   ：S?la is an upholding, meaning a state of bliss owing to its serving as a foundation for profitable states.； Only when you have s?la, can you have wholesome mental states. Therefore s?la is something like upholding. These are the two meanings of s?la. 
   ：For those who understand etymology (that means grammarians) admit only these two meanings. Others however, comment on the meaning here in the way beginning ． The meaning of virtue (s?la) is the meaning of head (siras), the meaning of virtue is the meaning of cool (s?tala).； That is playing upon the word. The P??i word ．s?la・ is close to the word ．siras・ and is also close to the word ．s?tala・. So they may explain in this way, but it is not accepted by the commentator here. 
   ：What are the characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause of sila?； I think you are familiar with these. Whenever we have to understand something, we have to understand by way of characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause. Only then do we understand thoroughly. 
   Especially when you practice meditation, you come to understand things sometimes by way of characteristic. That means you see things by means of characteristic. Sometimes you see the function. Sometimes you see the manifestation and sometimes you see the proximate cause. So with reference to these four we have to understand things. 
   Therefore we must understand s?la with reference to these four aspects. What is its characteristic? That means what is its individual essence or its nature. The characteristic of s?la is just composing, the same as that mentioned earlier. ：Just as visibleness  is the characteristic of the visible-data base even when analyzed into the various categories of blue, yellow etc., because even when analyzed into these categories, it does not exceed visibleness, so also this composing, described above as the coordinating of bodily action, etc., and as the foundation of profitable states, is the characteristic of virtue even when analyzed into the various categories of volition etc., because even when analyzed into these categories, it does not exceed the state of coordination and foundation.； ．Visible-data base・ just means the visible object. Among the 28 material properties there is one thing which can be seen. That is the only thing that can be seen by our eyes. It is translated as form or visible object. The characteristic of that visible object just visibleness. That it can be seen is its characteristic. Although we may say that visible objects are red, yellow, blue, white and so on, but according to characteristic they are only one, visible data which has the characteristic of visibleness. 
   In the same way we may describe cetan? as s?la. Cetasikas are s?la. Restraint is s?la. Non-transgression is s?la. However many varieties of s?la there may be, the characteristic, the common nature of all kinds of different s?la is just composing. So it has the characteristic of composing. 
   What is its function? The P??i word for function is rasa. Rasa has two meanings. One meaning is action or function and the other meaning is achievement. Sometimes function as action is used. Sometimes function as achievement is used. Here both are mentioned. The function of sila is the stopping of misconduct. When you have sila, you do not break precepts. You do not have misconduct. Stopping misconduct is its function or is its nature. Blamelessness is its function as achievement. That means when you achieve purity of sila, then you are blameless. Blamelessness is actually the outcome of the purity of s?la. Blamelessness is also said to be the function of s?la. The P??i word ．rasa・ has two meanings - action or achievement. 
   What is the manifestation of s?la? ：Now virtue, so say those who know, itself as purity will show; and for its proximate cause they tell the pair, conscience and shame as well.； Manifestation of s?la is just purity. When we concentrate on sila, it appears to us as purity. S?la is real purity. So purity is the manifestation of s?la or virtue.
   The proximate causes of s?la are conscience and shame. Actually the proximate causes are shame and fear. ．Shame・ is the shame to do unwholesome things. ．Fear・ is the fear to do unwholesome things. If we do unwholesome things, if our moral conduct is not pure, we will get bad results. So this shame and fear are called ．the proximate causes of s?la.・ So long as people have this shame and fear, they will keep precepts. The moment these two leave people, then they will do anything they like.
Student: Could you define what proximate cause is?
Teacher: There are two kinds of causes - near cause and far cause. It is near cause.
   Please read about 20 or 20 pages for next week. After you have read, then you can come to the class and we can discuss.
Student: I have heard that if you want to really study Therav?da Buddhism you need a cave and you need this book.
Teacher: That・s right. It is held in very high esteem in Therav?da countries. It is next to the Buddha actually. This is the Burmese edition of the book in P??i, the first volume.
Student: This book is meant for monks. Does it have any place for ordinary folks like us?
Teacher: You have to be patient with the first two chapters because the rules and practices are for monks. But you can adapt some of the statements in this chapter and the next chapter to s?la for lay people. Monks are exhorted to be very strict with regard to their rules. They are exhorted not to break even a small rule. It is said that one should see danger even in the smallest transgression. In the same way if you are going to practice meditation, then you have to clear the bases. You have to establish a firm foundation of moral purity first. As a lay person you take precepts, at least five precepts and you keep them. You are not to break any one of these rules. You are to keep them intact. You may be exhorted not to break any of these rules even though your life is in danger. We can adapt the admonition or the advice given in this chapter to the practice of lay people too. This chapter deals with monks・ behavior, monks・ s?la. 
   I am afraid you will find many improper conduct and resorts mentioned here. You will know how monks are clever in acquiring things for themselves and clever in not telling direct lies, but in saying white lies or something like that. 
   One thing that is good about the Commentaries is that they give many stories. We can learn from these stories. From the third chapter onward it is for those who practice meditation whether a lay person or a monk. Still the emphasis is on monks because monks were those who practiced meditation more than lay people. However that is no longer true. Lay people are also very interested in meditation now.
   In Burma about the turn of the century monks became interested in the practice of vipassan? meditation. They gave chance to lay people to practice vipassan? meditation. Formerly lay people did not think that they could practice much meditation because they had things to do in the world. Even though you are a monk, they think that you have to go to a very secluded place and stay there alone and practice meditation. The teacher of my teacher, Venerable Mah?si Say?daw, was one of the pioneers of rekindling of interest of the practice of meditation both by monks and by lay people. I think that he was the first who taught meditation to lay people and who accepted lay people at the monastery to practice intensive meditation like we do now. 
Student: What was his name?
Teacher: His personal name was Venerable U N?rada, but he was known as the Mungun Say?daw. His name was mentioned in Venerable Nyanaponika・s book, The Heart of Buddhist Meditation. So now many lay people practice vipassan? meditation. Also in this country many people are interested in meditation. I think this is a good trend that Buddhism is going towards. After all practice is what counts. Just understanding or just knowing theoretically will not help us much. We must put this theoretical knowledge into practice.
   The study and practice I think should go together. Just study will not help us much. Something that you see through the practice helps you to have deeper understanding of what you know from the books. These two should go together - practice and meditation. 
   Thank you very much.
?
                      S?dhu!   S?dhu!    S?dhu! 
 
(Tape 2 / Ps: 23-52) 

   Let us go back to the structure of the first chapter. I am referring to the detailed table of contents. This chapter deals with what is translated as virtue. In P??i it is s?la. A stanza from the Sa?yutta Nik?ya is used as an introduction. Then the author explains what the path of purification is along with a commentary on the stanza at the beginning of the book. Then the author goes on to explain s?la or virtue - what is s?la, what is virtue. He explained that volition is virtue, mental factors are virtue, restraint is virtue, and non-transgression is virtue. This he explained according to a Text called ．Pa?isambhid?・. In connection with restraint the author explained five kinds of restraint -restraint by P??imokkha, restraint by mindfulness, restraint by knowledge, restraint by patience, and restraint by energy. (paragraph 18)
   After explaining what virtue is or what is taken to be virtue according to the teachings of Therav?da Buddhism, the author goes on to explain the meaning of the P??i word ．s?la・ or why virtue is called ．s?la・ in P??i. The explanation given is that it is called ．s?la・ because it coordinates the bodily and verbal actions. Also it serves as a foundation for the formation of wholesome states. So the two basic meanings of the word are given there. One is coordinating and the other is the basis for holding up.
   Next the author gives the characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause of virtue. It is customary with Therav?da authors that whenever there is something to be studied or to be understood that they explain that thing according to its characteristic, its function, its manifestation and its proximate cause. In Abhidhamma also citta, the 52 cetasikas and so on are explained with reference to their characteristics, functions, manifestations and proximate causes. The characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause of virtue are given in paragraphs 20-22.
   Then the author gives the benefits of virtue, the benefits of having pure virtue or pure s?la. Then he describes the different kinds of virtue which takes up the rest of the first chapter. 
   This week we will begin with the benefits of virtue. In paragraph 23 the author first begins with a quote from the A?guttara Nik?ya. Do you see A.v.1? ．A・ means A?guttara Nik?ya. It is the name of one of the five collections. The translation of A?guttara Nik?ya is Gradual Sayings. There are five volumes.
   Further down in paragraph 23 you see D.ii.86. ．D・ means D?gha Nik?ya. It is another collection. The translation of this collection is called Dialogues of the Buddha. There are three volumes. 
   A little further down you will see M.i.33. ．M・ means Majjhima Nik?ya. It is another division of suttas. The translation of this collection is Middle Length Sayings. I hope you have read all these. These are the benefits of virtue. 
   On the next page in paragraph 24 the author gives the benefits of virtue in verse form. About  six lines from the bottom it says, ：Virtue does away with self-blame and the like.； ．Self-blame and the like・ - what are the others? The benefits of being virtuous or of having pure or good s?la are four. The dangers of not being virtuous of having bad s?la are also four. 
   The first of these four is self-blame or self-reproach. When our moral conduct is impure, the first blame comes from us because we are the first to know what we did. So self-blame or self-reproach comes first.
   Then there is the blame of others or the reproach of others. If we do not keep our rules properly or if we break our precepts, other people will also blame us. There is the blame of others or the reproach of others. 
   The third disadvantage of bad s?la is punishment. If we do not keep precepts, then we may commit crimes. We may kill beings or we may kill human beings. We may steal and so on. As a result of this, we will get punishment in this life. That is another danger of having impure moral conduct. 
   The fourth one is having an unhappy destiny. That means rebirth in the four woeful states or the four states of loss - rebirth in hell, rebirth in the animal kingdom, rebirth as a hungry ghost and rebirth as another kind of ghost. These are the four disadvantages of being impure in moral conduct. The opposite of these are the four benefits. 
   ：Virtue entirely does away with dread of self-blame and the like.； Virtue entirely does away with the danger of these four namely self-reproach, reproach of others, punishment and unhappy destiny.；
   Then the author gives the kinds of virtue. Western people often say that Eastern people are fond of numbers. Here virtue is explained as of one kind, two kinds, three kinds, five kinds. First the author just gives a list of them. Then they are explained in detail. 
   There is only one s?la or one kind of virtue according to the characteristic. When we take into account the characteristic, there is only one virtue which has the characteristic of coordinating bodily and verbal actions and upholding people.
   Then there are two kinds, three kinds and five kinds of virtue. You may read the list.
   I want to make some changes in paragraph 41, section 16. The author is explaining four kinds of virtue. He mentions natural virtue, customary virtue, necessary virtue and virtue due to previous causes. I think we should say ．ingrained virtue・ instead of ．necessary virtue・. The P??i word here is Dhammat?. That means the way it is. That means ingrained virtue. The last one is virtue due to previous causes. Here ．previous causes・ means causes in previous lives. People are virtuous because they were virtuous in their past lives too. This being virtuous is carried over from past lives.
   In the detailed explanation in paragraph 26 - ：Herein, keeping is accomplished by faith and energy; avoiding, by faith and mindfulness.； In this paragraph there are two kinds of virtue. One is keeping and one is avoiding. ．Keeping・ means following the advice that this should not be done. Most precepts are about what should not be done. One must not kill, one must not steal and so on. Sometimes we should do this and sometimes we should not do that. If we do not do these things, we come to some state that lacks virtue or is impure. 
   The ．keeping・ is accomplished by faith and energy. There are rules which say that the monks must do certain things at the monastery for example. This kind of s?la or virtue is accomplished by faith. If you have faith or confidence in the Buddha, if you have energy or effort, then you can keep that s?la. 
   In this translation it says that ．avoiding・ is accomplished by faith and mindfulness. In the Burmese-P??i edition and also in the P??i Text Society edition there is no word for mindfulness. We should strike out the two words ．and mindfulness・ here. We should just say, ：Avoiding is accomplished by faith.； Only when you have faith and when you have confidence in the Buddha and in the rules, can you keep yourself from breaking the rules. This is accomplished through faith and not by mindfulness. ：Mindfulness； is not supported by the Commentary on this book. We call it a Sub-Commentary. In the Sub-Commentary also only the word ．faith・ or in P??i the word ．saddha・ is explained and  not mindfulness or sati. We should say here, ：Avoiding is accomplished by faith.； If you have faith or confidence in the Buddha and his teachings, then you can follow the rules that prohibit you from doing certain things.
Student: What does ．keeping by energy・ mean?
Teacher: You have to do something when you follow rules that say something must be done. For example there are duties to be done for our teachers. We must get up early in the morning before the teacher gets up. We must offer him water for washing his face. If there is something to eat, we must offer it to him. We must do some chores for him and so on. This is the first kind of ．keeping・. If we do not have faith and if we do not make effort, we will not accomplish that kind of s?la. So there both sila and energy are required. Refraining from something needs only faith, not necessarily mindfulness.
   In the next paragraph ：that of good behaviour； and ：that of the beginning of the life of purity； - they are terms that are directly translated from P??i. 
   About four lines down it says: ：This is a term for the virtue that has livelihood as eighth.； A couple of lines before it says: ：this is a term for virtue other than that which has livelihood as eighth.； The eight are given in the footnote. They are refraining from three wrong bodily actions, refraining from four wrong verbal actions and refraining from wrong livelihood. These constitute eight precepts. These eight precepts are different from the eight precepts to be mentioned a little later. These precepts are called those that have livelihood as eighth. The others are different. 
   ：This is a term for the virtue that has livelihood as eighth. It is the initial stage of the path because it has to be purified in the prior stage too.； I think there is no word for ．too・ in the original P??i. We should leave out ．too・. 
   This sila has to be accomplished before we take up the beginning of the life of purity. That means before we practice meditation, we have to purify our moral conduct. So it has to be accomplished or purified in the prior stage of the path. ．The path・ here means the practice of meditation leading to enlightenment.
   In paragraph 29 four kinds of s?la are mentioned. ：There are two kinds of dependence - dependence through craving and dependence through false view.； Craving itself is dependence here. False view itself is dependence here. Sometimes we have attachment. We have lobha. We want to be reborn in a better world. We want to be reborn as a deva or a celestial being. Or we may want to be reborn as a human being of good family. It is something like that. We practice s?la in order that we may be reborn in a better existence. That s?la is dependent upon craving or attachment. Because we have attachment to these lives we do something so that we may be reborn there. So craving itself is dependence. It is not dependence through craving, but dependence as craving we may say.
   Sometimes we have the false view that purification is through virtuous conduct. That means we believe that we can become purified through virtue only. That is a false view because we have to practice virtue first, then concentration and then wisdom. Virtue alone, by itself, will not help us to become enlightened, to become purified. ．Purification・ here means purification of mind in the form of enlightenment. Enlightenment can be gained only through vipassan? meditation, only through practice of wisdom. That practice of wisdom is possible only when there is concentration. And concentration can be built only on the purification of moral conduct. Purification of moral conduct alone, by itself, cannot lead us to emancipation or enlightenment. That is a false view. Through this false view we practice s?la. Here false view is a dependence for the practice of s?la. So there are two kinds.
   Let us go back a little. Do you understand the ．Double Code・ in about the middle of paragraph 27 - ： what is included in the Double Code (the bhikkhus・ and bhikkhunis・ Patimokkha)K；? Bhikkhus are monks and bhikkhunis are nuns. Rules for monks and nuns are technically called ．P??imokkha・. The word ．P??imokkha・ is given  in the translation. Since there are two, it is called ．Double Code・. There are 227 rules for monks and 311 rules for nuns or bhikkhunis. Women have more rules than monks have. Both belong to the beginning of the life of purity. 
   ：And that included in the duties set out in the Khandhakas (of Vinaya)； - you know there are three Pi?akas. The first is Vinaya Pi?aka. That Pi?aka consists of rules for monks and nuns and so on. Vinaya Pi?aka is composed of the 227 rules for monks, the 311 rules for nuns, the stories leading to the laying down of these rules and some explanations of the words in the rules. They are called ．Sutta Vibha~ga・. 
   Then there are some other books which are called ．Khandhakas・. ．Khandhaka・ just means section. In the Khandhakas mostly rules pertaining to ．keeping・ are given. There are Khandhakas telling how to perform the ordination ceremony, what qualifications one must have to be ordained and so on. In another section the duties which are to be performed for our teachers or for our pupils, or for guest monks are mentioned. These are called ．Khandhakas・. Included in the duties set out in the Khandhakas is that of good behaviour. There are two books containing these Khandhakas. One is called ．Great Khandhaka・ and the other is called ．Small or Lesser Khandhaka・ .
   Those are very interesting books if you are interested in social conditions during the time of the Buddha. What utensils they used, how they made houses, all these things are mentioned in these books. As the number of monks grew, there were more and more problems. Sometimes those monks were like children. They would go to the Buddha and ask him what to do. For example monks have to prepare dye for themselves. They have to boil bark of a tree or wood from which they would get color. Sometimes the pots would overflow or boil over. Then they would go to the Buddha and report it to him. They would ask him what to do and then he would say to use a filter or something. These books are interesting. The duties and other things contained in these books are called ．the virtue that is of good behaviour. They are set out in the Khandhakas.
   In paragraph 32 - ：In the seventh dyad all virtue subject to cankers is mundane.； I hope you understand what ．subject to cankers・ is. What is ．subject to cankers・? ．Cankers・ means mental defilements. ．Subject to mental defilements・ really means the object of mental defilements. The virtue which is the object of mental defilements is called ．mundane・ and virtue which is not the object of mental defilements is called ．supramundane・.
   In the next paragraph - ：In the first of the triads the inferior is produced by inferior zeal, (purity of) consciousness, energy, or inquiry.； You have to understand these four. The P??i word for zeal is chanda. You have met chanda among the 52 mental factors. It is translated there as conation.  ．Chanda・ means the will-to-do. The mere will-to-do is called ．chanda・. It is not desire. It is not attachment. It is just the will to do something. Let us say you want to pick up a book. That will to pick up the book is called ．chanda・. In the first instance that will, zeal or chanda is inferior. 
   There are four kinds of what are called ．adhipati・ (dominating factors). Please read The Manual of Abhidhamma, chapter 7. In that chapter you will find these four adhipati. These four are called ．dominating factors・. They arise with other mental factors and one of them predominates. Sometimes chanda predominates. Sometimes citta predominates and so on. They are called ．dominating factors・. 
   The next factor is (purity of) consciousness. Here it is not necessarily ．purity of consciousness・, but just ．consciousness・. Then there is energy. After that we have inquiry. ．Inquiry・ means knowledge or understanding. It is not really inquiry into something. The P??i word for inquiry is v?ma?s?. V?ma?s? is translated as inquiry. The basic meaning of v?ma?s? is inquiry. That is correct. It is a synonym for the P??i word ．pa???・ (understanding). So here sometimes understanding, or knowledge, or wisdom predominates. 
    If one of these four is inferior, then the s?la is called ．inferior s?la・. When they are medium, then the s?la is medium. When they are superior, the s?la is superior. Please read The manual of Abhidhamma, chapter 7, to learn more about these dominating factors. 
   ：That motivated by craving, the purpose of which is to enjoy continued existence is inferior.； Actually what it means here is to enjoy better existence and to enjoy wealth or something in that existence, not continued existence. It is to enjoy better existence and to enjoy some things there.
    In paragraph 35,the third line - ：that practiced by the magnanimous ordinary man...； - what is ．magnanimous ordinary man・? The P??i word is puthujjana. Puthujjana is a person who has not reached any of the stages of enlightenment. We may call him an ordinary person. The usual translation of that word is worldling, so ordinary worldling.
Student: What does ．magnanimous・ mean?
Teacher: ．Magnanimous・ here actually means he has good moral habits and that he is well-read. To translate directly it is he has heard well. During the time of the Buddha and some time thereafter there were no books. Whatever you learned, you learned from someone. 
   I hope you have read these pages. I will be picking places where I want to give you some more information. Please go to paragraph 40. ：In the second tetrad there are training precepts announced for bhikkhus to keep irrespective of what is announced for bhikkhunis.； ．Irrespective of what is announced for bhikkhunis・ - what do you understand by that? There are 227 rules for monks and 311 rules for nuns. There are rules which are common to both monks and nuns and there are others which are not common. The monks must keep the 227 rules and also some of the rules laid down for nuns. That is what is meant here. So there are not just 227 rules for monks, but also some other rules which were originally meant for nuns. Monks must also keep these rules.
   For example there is no rule among the 227 rules that monks must not sing, or dance, or go to shows and so on. However there is that rule for the bhikkhunis. Monks must also keep that rule even though it is not included in the 227 rules. When we say ．monks・ rules・, we mean these 227 rules plus some other rules. Monks must keep these rules also, even though they are not in the rules for monks. There are rules which are common to both monks and nuns. And there are other rules. Monks must keep those rules too. 
Student: It is translated poorly.
Teacher: The translation is not so good here. The meaning is that. ．Irrespective・ is not correct.
   ：The ten precepts of virtue for male and female novices are the virtue of the not fully admitted. The five training precepts - ten when possible - as a permanent undertaking...； - here also the translation is a little incorrect. The five training precepts are permanent training. They are called in P??i ．niccas?la・. You know that the word ．anicca・ is impermanent. So nicca is permanent. These precepts are called ．permanent s?la・. That means if you claim to be a follower of the Buddha, you must keep these five precepts. They must be with you always. So they are a permanent undertaking. Ten are to be undertaken when you can. The five are to be taken as training precepts as a permanent undertaking, ten when possible. 
    ：The five training precepts - ten when possible - as a permanent undertaking, and eight as the factors of Uposatha Day, for male and female lay followers are the virtue of the laity.； It should say ．eight as the factors of Uposatha・, not day, just Uposatha. The P??i word ．Uposatha・ can mean two things - the observance and the day of observance. Here the day is not meant. ．The eight as factors of Uposatha・ means the eight precepts - the five permanent precepts plus not eating after mid-day, not using flowers, perfumes and so on and also not singing and dancing, and not using luxurious beds and seats. These precepts are called ．Uposatha precepts・. The most  important is not eating after mid-day. These eight precepts are called ．Uposatha. If it is Uposatha for lay people, we mean these eight precepts. Uposatha for monks is different. Uposatha for monks is just the recitation of the 227 rules in an assembly.
   So lay people should take and always keep five precepts. If they can, they should take eight precepts on certain days of the month. The usual days these precepts are taken are the full moon day, the new moon day, and the eighth day of each half month. 
   We go by the lunar months. The month is divided into two halves - the bright half and the dark half. The middle of the bright half is the eighth day. The middle of the dark half is also the eighth day. For at least four days in the month people in Buddhist countries like Burma, Sri Lanka and Thailand observe Uposatha. Mostly they go to monasteries and keep eight precepts. The people stay and hear talks on Dhamma, offer food or something to the monks and practice meditation. In Thailand, Laos and Cambodia  they even spend the night at the monastery. They only go back home the next morning. That is called ．Uposatha・. It is the virtue for male and female laity. For monks as I said, they assemble at some place. One of the monks recites the P??imokkha and the other monks pay respectful attention to his recitation.
   You know there were no books in the olden days. In order that they would not forget the rules or in order that the monks would remember the rules, the monks had to recite the rules in this way. They learn the rules by heart. At the Uposatha one monk recites the rules and the other monks pay attention to the recitation. This is called ．Uposatha for monks・.
   In paragraph 42 the author explains the four kinds of s?la or the four kinds of virtue often mentioned in the Suttas. For monks these are the important kinds of virtue. These will be explained in more detail than the others. The author gives the texts from the Suttas.
   ：The virtue described by the blessed One thus: ．Here a Bhikkhu dwells restrained with the P??imokkha restraint possessed of the (proper) conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest fault, he trains himself by undertaking the precepts of training・ is virtue of P??imokkha restraint.； This is one kind of s?la. ．Virtue of P??imokkha restraint・ means simply keeping the P??imokkha rules, keeping the 227 rules or the 311 rules, keeping them unbroken. 
   Section b of paragraph 42 shows the restraint of the sense faculties. That means restraint of eyes, ears and so on. Strictly speaking it is not s?la because it is not keeping any rules. When you have restraint of sense faculties, your s?la is practically pure. So it is included as sila.
   ：On seeing a visible object with the eye, he apprehends neither the signs nor the particulars through which, if he left the eye faculty unguarded, evil and unprofitable states of covetousness and grief might invade him; he enters upon the way of restraint, he guards the eye faculty, undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty.； What it means is that when you see something, you try not to get akusala from it. That is what is meant by restraint of the senses. 
  For example you may see a beautiful thing. If you have no wise attention, then you will get attached to the thing and there will be akusala. To keep yourself from getting akusala, from getting unwholesome thoughts, you practice mindfulness actually. The practice of mindfulness is to prevent attachment to these objects. It does not mean that we are to close our eyes or our ears and not look or listen to things. It does not mean that. We will be seeing things and we will be hearing sounds. What the restraint here means is not to have akusala when we come across these objects. 
   The third in section c is the virtue of livelihood purification. For monks ．pure livelihood・ means getting requisites by proper means. That means by going on alms round monks get food. By picking up pieces of cloth they can make it into a robe and wear it and so on. This is good livelihood for monks. If monks do not follow these rules, then there is no virtue of livelihood purification. It will also be explained in detail later.
   ：Abstinence from such wrong livelihood as entails transgression of the six training precepts announced with respect to livelihood and entails the evil states beginning with ．scheming, talking, hinting, belittling, pursuing gain・ is the virtue of livelihood purification.； If you have read through this chapter, you will know what these are. I am afraid that you know more about the bad tricks monks use to obtain what they want.
   The six training precepts we will find in paragraph 60. In paragraph 60 these are given one by one. ：With livelihood as cause, with livelihood as reason, one of evil wishes, a prey to wishes, lays claim to a higher than human state that is non-existent, not a fact, the contravention of which is defeat.；
   Let us suppose that I want to be rich. I want to possess many requisites. I want to possess many things. Even though I have not obtained any of the stages of enlightenment, I will say that I am enlightened or something similar. This is so that you will think much of me and offer me many things. It is something like that. Such a breech of rules is caused by livelihood.
   Or perhaps I don・t want to go out for alms. I want to be at the monastery and just let people bring rich food to me and so on. This also is impure livelihood for monks. These six rules are proclaimed or laid down with regard to monks・ livelihood.
   You see the word ．defeat・ there. These are technical words. ．Defeat・ means if a monk breaks this rule, he is finished as a monk. He is defeated as a monk. He is no longer a monk, even though he may still go on wearing the robes, even though he may still go on admitting himself as a monk. In fact, in reality he is not a monk the moment that he says this and the other person understands it. There are these six rules. We will come to these six rules later.
Student: What happens if the person does not understand?
Teacher: If the person spoken to does not understand at that moment, he is not defeated. But if the person to whom he is speaking knows at that moment that the man is saying that he is enlightened and the monk is not really enlightened, then there is defeat. 
   I think you have read what are resorts and others for monks and what are not resorts for monks. ．Resorts・ are things which monks must engage in and things which monks must not engage in. In paragraph 44, in about the middle of the paragraph, you will find: ：Here someone makes a livelihood by gifts of bamboo, or by gifts of leaves, or by gifts of flowers, fruits, bathing powder, and tooth sticks, or by flattery, or by bean-soupery (do you know that?), or by fondling； - I will come to ．bean-soupery・ later. ．By fondling・ really means baby-sitting, picking up a baby and taking care of it, not just by fondling. It is taking care of a baby. Someone leaves a baby with a monk, and if he takes care of the baby in order to please that person, then it is called ．fondling・.
   Now ．bean-soupery・ means having a livelihood that resembles bean-soupery. You still don・t understand, right? Please turn to paragraph 75. ：Bean-soupery is resemblance to bean soup; for just as when beans are being cooked only a few do not get cooked, the rest get cooked, so too the person in whose speech only a little is true, the rest being false, is called a ．bean soup・; his state is bean-soupery.； Most of what such a person says is just lies.
   There is an expression in English that is somewhat similar - ．half-baked・, but it does not mean the same thing. It does not mean this. If most of what I say is not true and only a little of what I say is true, then I am guilty of this ．bean-soupery・.
   In paragraph 45 we have ．resort・. We have to understand this properly. There is proper resort and improper resort. ：Herein, what is improper resort? Here someone has ．prostitutes as resort, or he has widows, old maids, eunuchs, bhikkhunis, or taverns as resort・.； ．Having them as resort・ means being friends with them, being intimate with them, frequenting their houses. That is what is meant by ．having them as resort・. So there are some places which monks must always avoid, the places of these people.
   Then in paragraph 49 there is another kind of resort. ：Proper resort is of three kinds: proper resort as support, proper resort as guarding, and proper resort as anchoring.；
   ：Herein, what is proper resort as support? A good friend who exhibits ten instances of talk (those are given in the footnote), in whose presence one hears what has not been heardK； and so on. ．In whose presence・ really means depending on whom, not just in his presence. That means from him. You hear something from him. That is what is meant here.
  ：...Corrects what has been heard, gets rid of doubt, rectifies one・s view and gains confidence...； - these are the benefits of hearing Dhamma talk. The Buddha said in one Sutta that there are five benefits to be gained from listening to a Dhamma talk. The first one is that you hear what you have not heard before. There is new information. Then you correct what has been heard. That means you can clarify what you have heard before. When you hear it again, then you get rid of doubt. That is the third benefit. One may rectify one・s view. If you have a wrong view, you can set it right when you listen to the Dhamma talk. You gain confidence. That means your mind becomes full of confidence. These are the five benefits to be gained from listening to a Dhamma talk.
   ：...Or by training under whom...； - actually ．not by training under whom・, but by following his example. So it should be ：or by whose example one grows in faith, virtue, learning, generosity - this is called (proper) resort as support.；
   In the next paragraph it says, ：What is (proper) resort as guarding? Here ．a bhikkhu, having entered inside a house, having gone into a street・,...；. The translator always makes this mistake. The P??i word is antaraghara. ．Ghara・ means house. ．Antara・ means in, between, or within. He translated antaraghara as inside a house because ．antara・ can mean inside and ．ghara・ means house. But the real meaning is a place which has houses in it. So it means a village. So ：A bhikkhu having entered a village, having gone into a street, goes with downcast eyes, seeing the length of a plow yoke.； So it is not ．inside a house・. Monks must keep their eyes down when they go out into the village or into the town, not just inside a house. This is a wrong rendering of the P??i word.
   ：Seeing the length of a plow yoke...； - in fact it is not a plow yoke. It is a carriage yoke. A yoke is said to be about four cubits long. That is about six feet. So a monk should look ahead about six feet on the ground. He should not look up or sideways. 
   It may be possible where it is not so crowded. In modern cities it is impossible. You have to look. If you just look down and walk, you will be knocked down by a car or something. But monks are trained to keep their eyes down - ：not looking at an elephant, at a horse, a carriage, a pedestrian, a woman, a man...；and so on. 
   ：Seeing fear in the slightest fault； means seeing danger in the slightest fault. Even a very slight fault or transgression can bring harm to you. Especially when you practice meditation, this can be a great obstacle to your progress or to your concentration. A monk is instructed to keep the rules intact. Even if he has broken a minor rule and he has broken it intentionally, then the feeling of guilt is always with him. This feeling of guilt will torment him when he practices meditation. There is danger in even the slightest transgression. Seeing danger in the slightest transgression, he keeps his s?la (his virtue) really pure. 
   So we come to the end of P??imokkha restraint today. How many pages do we have to go through until the end of the first chapter? 58 pages. So maybe we will finish the first chapter in four weeks. Please read as much as you can.


                            S?dhu!   S?dhu!   S?dhu! 
(Tape 3 / Ps: 5-99) 

   This week we begin with paragraph 53. Beginning with this paragraph, there is a detailed explanation dealing with the passage given in paragraph 42b. There are four kinds of virtue - virtue pertaining to P??imokkha restraint, virtue of the restraint of the sense faculties, virtue of livelihood purification and virtue concerning requisites. We have finished the first one and now we are going to the second.
   In this paragraph the author speaks of the usage seeing with the eye, seeing the visible object with the eye. ．Seeing with the eye・ really means seeing with eye consciousness or seeing consciousness. The teachers of old explained that the eye cannot see because it has no mind and the mind cannot see because it has no sensitivity or eye; but when the object strikes against the sensitivity of the eye, there arises the eye consciousness or seeing consciousness. When we see something, we see with eye consciousness or seeing consciousness.
   The usage of ．seeing with the eye・ is described as ．accessory locution・. I don・t know what that means. In P??i it is called ．sasambh?rakath?・. The example given here is: ：He shot himself with his bow；. What is the meaning of ．to shoot・? The meaning of the Pali word is ．to hit・ or ．to pierce・. He hit him with his bow. Actually he hit him with the arrow and not with the bow, but without the bow you cannot shoot the arrow. The usage is that he hits him with his bow.
   You say shoot with a gun? So perhaps shooting is not correct.
Student: You can shoot arrows with a bow and you can shoot bullets with a gun. ．To shoot with a bow・ is correct. Perhaps it is more correct to say you shot him with a bow and arrow.
Teacher: That・s right. When a monk sees a visible object, then he apprehends neither the signs nor the particulars. ．The sign・ here means the sign of a man or a woman. That means when a monk sees a person, he is not to see that person as a man or as a woman - ：or any sign that is a basis for defilement such as the sign of beauty etc., or as it is beautiful, or it is attractive and so on.； He stops at what is merely seen. He must train himself in just seeing and not going into evaluations. He must not evaluate the thing which is observed. 
   This kind of advice is given in many Suttas especially to M?lunky?putta and B?hiya. Buddha said just to stop at seeing and not to take the object as a man or as a woman, or as attractive or beautiful and so on.
   He does not take particulars. Here ．particulars・ means the aspects or shape or whatever of hand, foot, laughter, talk, looking ahead, looking aside and so on. These are called ．particulars・. In P??i that is anubya?jana. These things make known or particularize the defilements. When we take the particulars of what we see, the defilements grow in our minds. So we are not to take the signs or the particulars.
   ：He only apprehends what is really there.； That means he only apprehends the visible datum there, just seeing only a visible object, and not seeing a man or a woman. That is very difficult to achieve. That would be possible only when we practice mindfulness meditation. Without mindfulness meditation it is very difficult to stop at just seeing, and not seeing a man or a woman, or to stop seeing the particulars.
   For example you hear a sound from outside. In a fraction of a second you have gathered in the particulars of the sound - whose sound it is, where it comes from, whether it is loud or soft and so on. It is very difficult to stop at just hearing when we hear something and at just seeing when we see something. Long practice of vipassan? meditation can help us to achieve this. 
   In this story the monk was not practicing vipassan? meditation actually. He was practicing the contemplation on the foulness of the body or the 32 parts of the body. Among the 40 subjects of calm meditation there is one called ．contemplation of the body・. It consists in contemplating on the different parts of the body and viewing them as foul, repulsive and so on.
   This monk was practicing this kind of meditation, especially contemplating on the bones. He met a woman who laughed and showed her teeth. He got the sign of bones and not the particulars of that woman. That is why later he said: ：I did not know whether a man or a woman went this way; what I noticed was just a skeleton (a group of bones).； After that the sign of bones came to his mind. He contemplated on the bones with vipassan? as impermanent, as suffering, as without ego or insubstantial. In this way he was able to reach Arahantship while standing there. He had been practicing calm meditation for a long time. At that moment he practiced vipassan? meditation depending upon his subject of calm (samatha) meditation. So he reached Arahantship through the practice of vipassan? meditation actually.  
   In paragraph 57 and so on the author describes when restraint and non-restraint actually arise. I hope that you understand the passage. If you have gone through Abhidhamma, you will easily understand. ：Restraint or non-restraint is not actually in the eye faculty or the eye, since neither mindfulness nor forgetfulness arise in dependence on eye sensitivity. On the contrary when a visible datum as object comes into the eye・s focus, then, after the life-continuum has arisen twice and ceased, the functional mind-element accomplishing the function of adverting arises and ceases.； If you are familiar with Abhidhamma, you can understanding it easily. ．Life-continuum・ is bhava?ga. ．Functional mind-element accomplishing the function of adverting・ is just the five-sense-door-adverting (pa?cadv?r?vajjana).
   Do you have the diagram of the thought process in mind? You have to understand this with reference to the thought process. Actually moments of restraint or non-restraint only come at the moments of javana or impulsion. Restraint is kusala and non-restraint is akusala. Therefore there can be restraint or non-restraint only during the moments of javana. That is what the Commentary is telling us in these paragraphs. In five-sense-door-adverting there is neither restraint nor non-restraint. The same is true for seeing consciousness, receiving consciousness and so on. Only when we reach the javana stage or impulsion stage, will there be restraint or non-restraint. 
   In footnote 16 I would like to make some corrections or additions. In the second paragraph of the footnote ：There is no unvirtuousness , in other words, bodily or verbal misconduct in the five doors; consequently non-restraint (please put non-restraint) of unvirtuousness happens through the mind-door, and the remaining non-restraint (we should say ．non-restraint) happens through the six doors.； 
   ：For the arising of forgetfulness and the other three could be (．could be・ is better than ．would be・) in the five doors because (They can arise in five doors as well as the mind-door.) since they are unprofitable states (．unprofitable states・ means ．unwholesome states・) opposed to mindfulness etc.; but (．but not ．and・) there is no arising of unvirtuousness consisting in bodily and verbal transgression there because five-door impulsions do not  give rise to intimation.；
   Do you remember bodily intimation and verbal intimation among the 28 material properties? Among the 28 material properties there are two which are called ．bodily intimation・ and ．verbal intimation・. ．Bodily intimation・ means something like gesture and ．verbal intimation・ means not really speech but that which causes speech. They are called ．bodily intimation・ and ．verbal intimation・. 
   The Sub-Commentaries and all the teachers of old explain that the verbal intimation or bodily intimation can be caused only by the javanas of the mind-door thought process, not the five-door thought process. It is explained here as ：because five-door impulsions do not give rise to intimation.；
   ：And the five kinds of non-restraint beginning with unvirtuousness are stated here as the opposite of the five kinds of restraint beginning with ．restraint as virtue・.； These are given in paragraph 18. You may go back and read. So restraint or non-restraint only arise at the impulsion or javana stage.
   Next let us go to paragraph 60, the ．virtue of livelihood purification・. Are you familiar with the rules for monks?  These are called the P??imokkha rules・. There are 227 rules for monks or bhikkhus and 311 rules for nuns or bhikkhunis. When a monk or nun transgresses these rules, they come to some kind of offense. There are seven kinds of offenses. Six are mentioned in this passage.
   ：With livelihood as cause, with livelihood as reason, one of evil wishes, a prey to wishes, lays claim to a higher than human state that is non-existent, not a fact, the contravention of which is Defeat.； If a monk breaks this rule, he is defeated. He is no longer a monk although he may still be wearing robes and claiming that he is a monk. In reality he is not a monk.
   The next one is an offense entailing a meeting of the Order. That is the second gravest offense. When a monk comes to this offense, then he has to approach the Sa~gha or at least four monks in the initial stages. Finally there needs to be twenty monks to perform an act of Sa~gha. In order to get rid of that offense a meeting of the Order is required. That is the second gravest offense.
   The third one is a serious offense. This one can be gotten rid of just by making a confession. If a monk says, not referring to himself directly, ：The monk who lives in your monastery that you have donated is an Arahant.； Actually he wants to say, ：I am an Arahant.； He comes to this offense. He is not really an Arahant and he does not directly say that he is an Arahant. But he says that the monk who lives in your monastery is an Arahant. If the person to whom he is speaking understands what he is saying, then he comes to this offense. It says in this translation : ：The contravention of which is a serious offense in one who is aware of it.； ．Who is aware of it・ does not give the meaning of the P??i. Actually it means if the other person understands at that very moment.
   The Vinaya or Disciplinary Rules for monks is very much like law, the secular law. The monk only comes to this offense when the person understands at that very moment. If he does not understand immediately and perhaps he thinks about it later and understands, then the monk does not come to that offense. 
Student: You mean the person he is talking to?
Teacher: That・s right. Yes.
Student: If the person he is talking to thinks he is an Arahant, then it・s OK?
Teacher: That・s OK if the person doesn・t believe him. If the person knows that he is referring to himself, then there is this offense.
   Now let us go to the next one. ：With livelihood as cause, with livelihood as reason, a bhikkhu who is not sick eats superior food (I would say ．rich food・) that he has ordered for his own use.； ．Order・ here means to ask for. A monk must not ask people to give to him. His asking or begging is by standing silently. We pick up our bowls and stand in front of a house silently. That is our begging. It is called ．Ariyan begging・ or ．Noble begging・. We don・t say anything. We don・t say, ：Please give food to us； or whatever. With our bowls we stand at the entrance of a house. Then lay people come out and give us what they have. So ．order・ here means just asking. A monk must not ask.
   ：The contravention of which is an offense requiring expiation； - what is expiation? 
Student: Forgiveness.
Teacher: Actually it is forgiveness by confession. Monks make confessions to each other. It is not a confession like in Catholicism. We confess to each other.
   ：With livelihood as cause, with livelihood as reason, a bhikkhu who is not sick eats rich food that she has asked for her own use, the contravention of which is an offense requiring confession.； Here it should be ．special confession・, not just confession. There are two kinds of confession that we make according to which rules we have broken. The contravention of this rule requires a special confession to get rid of it.
Student: So for a bhikkhuni to do the same act is more of an offense?
Teacher: Not necessarily. There are some rules for monks also for which they must make special confession. Sometimes breaking the rule incurs different offenses for monks than for nuns.
   These are rules laid down with regard to livelihood for monks. Actually to purify his livelihood a monk must go out for alms. He must not do any other thing like fortune telling or reading palms and all these things. These are the six rules laid down especially with reference to the livelihood of a monk.
   Then there are other things given in the Visuddhi Magga. The author took them from another book called ．Mah? Niddesa・. It tells about ．scheming・ and other things. If you have read all these pages, you know how crafty monks were in those days. They are not difficult to understand. 
   Let us go to paragraph 74. ：Suggesting is insinuating by specifying thus, ．That family alone understands me・.； That is not correct. The correct meaning here is: ：That family knows me only and not others.； The monk wants to impress others. So ．I am the only one that the family knows・. It should be ．that family knows me only・ and not ．that family alone understands me・. If that family alone understands me, then I am not impressive. 
   In paragraph 78 ：And here there should be told the story of the bhikkhu supported by a family.； Here also it is not that the bhikkhu is supported by a family, but it is a bhikkhu who frequents families, who visits families quite often. This is so he may become acquainted with them in order to get some things from them. The translation should be ．the bhikkhu who frequents families・ not ．supported by a family・. Venerable N??amoli always makes this mistake. The P??i word is Kulapaka. ．Kula・ means family. ．Upaka・ means approaching. So it means approaching families. That means visiting the families to get acquainted with them.
   This is not a good quality for a monk. A monk should not visit families very often. When a monk is referred to as ．one who frequents families・, it is a kind of censure. The monk in this story is very cunning. In the end he gets what he wants. The woman became very frustrated and said: ：There is no hoodwinking the shaveling.； She could not deceive the monk. So she had to give the monk what there was in the house.
   Let me read footnote 24. ：You are a donkey, you belong to the states of loss, you belong to hell, you are a beast, there is not even a happy or an unhappy destiny to be expected for you.； That also is not correct. If someone were to say to me that there is neither a happy nor an unhappy destiny for me, I would be very glad because this is true only for an Arahant. These however are words of abuse. What it really means is that there is not a happy destiny for you. There is only an unhappy destiny for you. You are going to hell. There is not a happy destiny for you. Only an unhappy destiny is to be expected for you. It is taken from other books, not directly from the Visuddhi Magga. These are some words of abuse contemporary with the Buddha such as ：You are a thief, you are a fool, you are an idiot； and so on.
   In paragraph 85 towards the bottom of the paragraph ：Herein, reflecting wisely is reflecting as the means and as the way, by knowing, by reviewing, is the meaning.； With regard to the four requisites the monks have to make reflection whenever they get any one of the four requisites and also when they make use of them. When we put on our robes, we have to reflect on it like ：I put on the robe to ward off cold, to ward off heat, to avoid bites by insects.； When we eat also, we make reflection, ：I eat this not to beautify myself, not to take pride in my strength, just enough to keep me going in order to practice what the Buddha taught.； and so on. So reflection is meant here.
   The P??i word used here is yoniso pa?isankh?. It is the explanation of these words. So ．reflecting as the means and as the way・ really means reflecting by proper means or knowing by proper means, knowing what is the way. The meaning is just reviewing or reflecting with wisdom, with understanding. So reflecting wisely he uses the robe and so on.
   In paragraph 86 ：For protection: for the purpose of warding off, for the purpose of eliminating so that it may not arouse affliction in the body. For when the body is afflicted by cold, the distracted mind cannot be wisely exerted. That is why the Blessed One permitted the robe to be used for protection from cold. So in each instance, except that from heat means from the heat of fire, the origin of which should be understood as forest fires and so on.； Actually it is not the ．origin・ but the ：occurrence of which should be understood as forest fires and so on.； It is not origin. It should be occurrence or happening. The P??i word is sa?bhava. ．Sa?bhava・ can mean a cause or just happening. Here it means happening. The example of fire can be seen in a forest fire or a house fire and so on. ．Fire・ means that kind of fire.
   In paragraph 90 ：And here the clause neither for amusement is stated for the purpose of abandoning support for delusion.； Instead of ．support・ we may say ．basis for delusion・. Then farther down ：Nor for smartening nor for embellishment is said for the purpose of preventing the arising of fetters for another； - what does that mean? We should reflect this way in order not to have defilements and also so that other people will not have defilements for us. For example if w take food for smartening our self, for embellishing our self, then we will become attractive. So this may arouse defilements in other people as well. So instead of saying ：the arising of fetters for another； we should say ：the arising of fetters for others.； That means for others as well as ourselves. 
   At the end of paragraph 91 ：...for the endurance and continuance of this body can be understood to mean； we should put ．also・ after ．to mean・.
   In paragraph 92 about the middle of the paragraph ：For while this bhikkhu is engaged in crossing the desert of existence by means of devotion to the three trainings； - that means the practice of the three trainings. You know the three trainings. S?la, sam?dhi and pa??? are called ．the three trainings・. ．Devotion to・ really means ．practice of・.
   ：For while this bhikkhu is engaged in crossing the desert of existence by means of the practice of the three trainings depending on bodily strength whose necessary condition is the use of alms food, he makes use of it to assist the life of purity just as those seeking to cross the desert used their child・s flesh.； It refers to a Sutta in the Sa?yutta Nik?ya. You may read that story in the Book of Kindred Sayings, the second volume page 68. The reference given here is for the original P??i text. In the English version it is in volume two page 68. It is not a real story. Buddha gave it just as an example. You should view food in this way.
   Two people and a child were going through the desert. There was insufficient food supplies, so they could not make it to the end. The supplies dwindled so that they had nothing to eat. They discussed among themselves. If we cross over to a safe place, we can get a new baby. If we kill the baby and eat it, we can cross the desert. It was not expressly said in the Sutta that they killed the baby. The Commentary explained here that they did not kill the baby as though it were a real story. The father sent the baby to the mother and the mother sent the baby to the father. Going back and forth the child died. So the idea is that if you eat the flesh of your own child, you eat it because you have to, not because you want to. That is the point here. ：Those seeking to cross the desert used their child・s flesh, just as those seeking to cross a river use a raft, and just as those seeking to cross the ocean use a ship.；
   At the bottom of paragraph 94 there is a verse. ：With four or five lumps still to eat, let him then end by drinking water; for energetic bhikkhus・ needs, this should suffice to live in comfort.； This is a stanza much quoted by our teachers or by monks who want to advise other monks not to be greedy in eating. ：With four or five lumps still to eat, let him then end by drinking water.； So one doesn・t eat until one is full. Leave about four or five lumps. Drink water instead. This way you will be comfortable. This is true. If you eat too much especially when you are on a retreat and have to meditate, you will find it very difficult to meditate. It is better not to eat until you are full, but to eat a little less and to drink water instead.
   ：For energetic bhikkhus・ needs this should suffice to live in comfort.； ．Energetic bhikkhus・ really means a monk who has sent his mind to Nibb?na or to the attainment of Nibb?na. The P??i word is translated here differently by Western people from the traditional teachers. According to the traditional teachers the word means one who has directed his mind to the attainment of Nibb?na. Western scholars translate it to mean as having made effort or energetic. The P??i word is pahitata. It can have both meanings - one who has sent or directed his mind to Nibb?na or one who has made effort. The second meaning is preferred by Western scholars. So here it says ：for energetic bhikkhus・ needs；. Here ．energetic・ really means one who practices meditation for the purpose of attaining Nibb?na. ：This should suffice to live in comfort.；  A meditating monk should not eat much.
   Now let us look at resting place or dwelling place. What is a ．lean-to・?
Student: It is like a tent, a very rickety tent. 
Teacher: the P??i word is a??hayoga. Traditionally it is a building that has a roof in only one part. It is something like a lean-to. There are five kinds of dwellings for monks. One is a monastery. It is called a ．vih?ra・ in P??i. Then there is a lean-to and there are three more. The P??i word for a dwelling place for monks is sen?sana. ．Sena・ comes from the root which means ．to sleep・ or to ．lie down・. ?sana comes from the root which means ．to sit・. A place where a monk lies down or sleeps or a place where a monk sits is called his place, his dwelling place, his sen?sana. When a monk makes use of the dwelling place, that is when he enters the building or when he goes out of the building, then he must make this reflection: ：I use this dwelling place to ward of the cold, to ward off heat, to ward off bites of insects； and so on.
   The last one is the reflection on medicine. These are called ．the four requisites of monks・ - food, clothing, dwelling place, and medicine. In paragraph 96 it says, ：Any work of a medical man such as oil, honey, ghee, etc., that is suitable for one who is sick, is what is meant.； The word ．ghee・ is not in the P??i original.
   In Vinaya butter, oil, ghee, honey and molasses are called ．medicine・. These five are termed medicine in Vinaya. They can be taken as medicine. Monks can take honey or ghee in the afternoon, but not as food, only as medicine. ：Any requisite for life consisting of oil, honey, molasses, ghee etc., that is allowed by a medical man as suitable for the sick, is what is meant.；
   In paragraph 97 in the second part there is the explanation of the P??i word ．paccaya・. ：the word meaning here is this: because breathing things go, move, proceed, using (what they use) in dependence on these robes etc., these robes, etc., are therefore called requisites.； In fact instead of ．move, proceed・ we should say ．live・. ．Breathing things・ means living beings. So living beings live in dependence upon these robes and other things, using them. That is why they are called ．paccaya・ in P??i. It is not important that you understand the meaning of the word ．paccaya・. If you know that it means requisites here, it is enough.
   In the next paragraph ：So, in this fourfold virtue,  P??imokkha restraint has to be undertaken by means of faith. For that is accomplished by faith, since the announcing of training precepts is outside the disciples・ province.； It is very important. That is why we cannot change the rules. We cannot add anything to the rules and we cannot take anything out of the rules because the announcing or laying down of rules is not in the province of disciples. We cannot do that. Only the Buddha can do that. 
   If a monk has no faith or devotion to the Buddha・s teachings, he will not want to keep all these rules. That is why the P??imokkha restraint or the first virtue is to be undertaken by means of faith, by means of devotion to the Buddha. 
   ：The evidence here is the refusal of the request to (allow disciples to) announce training precepts.； Those in the brackets are to be stricken out. This refers to Vinaya. Venerable S?riputta asked the Buddha how the dispensation of different Buddhas fared. The dispensation of some Buddhas lasted long and the dispensation of other Buddhas did not last so long. Buddha answered that there were precepts and so on when the dispensation lasted long. So Venerable S?riputta requested the Buddha to lay down rules - ：Please lay down rules so that the dispensation of the Buddha may endure long.； The Buddha said, ：No. It is not time.； What the Buddha meant to say was that Venerable S?riputta did not know when to lay down rules and that he did. So the laying down of rules is not in the province of disciples. The words in the brackets are not in the original. They were put in by the translator wrongly. The evidence here is the refusal of the request to announce precepts or to lay down rules.
   ：Having therefore undertaken through faith the training precepts without exception as announced, one should completely perfect them without regard (even) for life.； Let・s put in the word ．even・, so ．even for life・.
   ：For this is said: ．As a hen guards her eggs, or as a yak her tail, or like a darling child, or like an only eye - so you who are engaged your virtue to protect, be prudent at all times and ever scrupulous・.； ．Be prudent・ really means be fond of your virtue. ．Scrupulous・ or the P??i word here means to have respect for the rules, the Buddha, the Dhamma, the Sa~gha and so on. Then we have the story. It is not difficult to understand.
   In paragraph 99 it says, ：He augmented his insight.； I hope you understand that. What・s that?
Student: He saw into the future?
Teacher: Actually he practiced vipassan? meditation. 
   In the second story ：Also they bound another Elder in Tambapa??i Island (Sr? Lanka) with string creepers and made him lie down. When a forest fire came and the creepers were not cut...； - no, this is not correct. Here it should be ：When the forest fire came, without cutting the creepers, he established insight.； He was bound with creepers and when the forest fire came, he could easily cut the creepers and escape, but to cut the creepers means to break the rule of the Buddha. So he would sooner give up his life than break the rules of the Buddha. So without cutting the creepers, he practiced meditation. He became an Arahant.
    ：When a forest fire came, without cutting the creepers, he established insight and attained Nibb?na simultaneously with his death.； ．Simultaneously・ means almost simultaneously, not at the same moment. Mind works very fast. So the two came almost simultaneously. He became an Arahant and then he died.
   The advice given with regard to this story is: ：Maintain the rules of conduct pure, renouncing life if there be need, rather than break virtue・s restraint by the worlds・ saviour decreed.； So you should give up your life rather than breaking the rules laid down by the Buddha.
   Do you have any questions?
Student: I am a little curious about all this which is essentially asceticism. The Buddha renounced asceticism. How are these two resolved?
Teacher: When it says the Buddha renounced asceticism, it means that he renounced unnecessarily inflicting pain on oneself or self-mortification. For example when he was in the forest practicing to become the Buddha, he reduced his food little by little. At first he went out for alms and ate that food. Then he took fruit from trees and ate that. Later he took only the fruit that had fallen. Later on he took only the fruit from the tree under which he was living. So little by little he reduced eating so that his body became very thin, emaciated. It was unnecessarily inflicting suffering upon himself. That asceticism Buddha refused or denied.
   Ascetic practices given here are not that severe, not that rigorous. They are things such as eating in one bowl only or when you go out for alms, you do not skip any house. These are called ．ascetic practices・, but they are not like those practiced by the other hermits or sages during the Buddha・s time. We will come to the ascetic practices in the second chapter. 
   One thing that I want to say is that when I went to the Zen Center in Japan I saw that they rinsed the bowls and then drank the water from the bowls. It reminded me of one of the ascetic practices that Therav?da monks practice. That practice is to eat in one bowl only. If you are to use one bowl only, then you eat in that bowl and you drink in that bowl. So i think there are some practices carried to countries far away from India. They have changed a little and so they seem to become very different practices, but I think there is something common in both practices.
Student: In the Zendo we eat that way and wash our bowls. You are always served. It is like alms. The food just comes. It is served to you. We don・t do begging, but in the way that we eat in the Zendo it is very similar.
Teacher: Yes. That・s right. When monks are invited to the houses of lay people during the time of the Buddha and even in the present time in Sr? Lanka, the monks sit in a row on the floor. The lay people take food and put it in their bowls like you eat in Zen Centers. That is the practice in Sr? Lanka and also in India. But in Myanmar it is different. We can see many similarities or common practices that have become a little changed depending on the country and on the people.
Student: The original intention seems to be the same.
Teacher: These are all dhuta~ga. ．Dhuta~ga・ means to shake off. These practices are undertaken to shake off defilements. They develop good qualities like fewness of wants, non-attachment to food and all these things.
Student: By that particular act you keep reminding yourself of why you are eating and so on.
Teacher: You always have to be on your guard to avoid mental defilements from coming to your mind.
Student: Many people talk about not liking their job or not feeling good about their livelihood. We can see here how monks are warned to be careful. So that is a reflection in our more complex society how we need to be careful in our behaviour, perhaps not in the exact same way.
Teacher: That・s right.
Student: In each act it is so easy to be selfish.
Student: So try to put Buddhism somewhere in everyday life. Be mindful.
Teacher: That・s right. In one of the Suttas in A~guttara Nik?ya daily reflections are given there. A monk or a lay person must make these reflections: I am old. I cannot avoid getting old. I will get disease and I cannot avoid that. One day I will die and I cannot get away from it. All that is mine will change and disappear. I am heir to kamma. Kamma is my only kinsman. These reflections have to be made every day both by monks and nuns and lay people. This is so they can get rid of pride in their youth, pride in their belongings and so on. That is a very good Sutta both for monks and for lay people. This is in the A~guttara Nik?ya, the Gradual Sayings. 
Student: But don・t you think that there might be some problem for some people who are depressed? If you do that too much, you might jump off the Golden Gate Bridge.
Teacher: That・s right. You have to follow the Middle Way. These reflections are to be made not to get depressed. It is to get rid of pride in yourself, or in your appearance, or in your body. It is for the purpose of getting rid of undesirable mental habits. They are not to be carried too far.
   You know once when the Buddha taught about the foulness of the body, monks got so disgusted with their bodies that they killed themselves and they asked other people to kill them. That really happened during the time of the Buddha. Buddha knew it would happen, but he could not avoid it. It is explained in the Commentaries that the kamma that these monks did together in the past got opportunity to give result at that time. Buddha thought that if they had to die, let them die with this kind of meditation. It would help them get a good rebirth. So the Buddha taught the foulness of the body meditation to them. Then he said: ：I must not be approached by any monk for 15 days.； He said that he wanted to be alone and would only see the monk who brought food to him. After 15 days he came out of seclusion. Then he asked Venerable ?nanda why there were fewer monks. Venerable ?nanda answered that there were fewer monks because he had taught that meditation. So Venerable ?nanda asked the Buddha to teach some other kind of meditation. Then the Buddha taught breathing meditation at that time.
Student: Is that a true story?
Teacher: Yes. That story is in the Book of Discipline if you want to read it. I don・t have the page number. It is given in connection with the third of the four rules of defeat. The third rule is not to kill human beings. Killing human beings is a grave offense for monks. That story is given there. 
   OK. Thank you. Please read to the end of the first chapter for next week.

                             S?dhu!      S?dhu!      S?dhu! 
(Tape 4 / Ps: 100-161)

   We were in paragraph 100. There are four kinds of virtue or s?la. The first is called ．P??imokkha restraint・. These are the rules in the disciplinary code for monks and nuns. That P??imokkha restraint is undertaken out of faith. Having faith in the Buddha and his teaching, the monks and nuns keep these P??imokkha rules intact.
    The next one is the restraint of the sense faculties. It is to be undertaken with mindfulness. In fact the restraint of the sense faculties is not strictly virtue or s?la. It is the control of one・s senses. The control of one・s senses can be done by mindfulness or should be done by mindfulness. When one sees an object, one must keep mindfulness with him or her, so that he or she will not get unwholesome thoughts or unwholesome mental states with regard to that object. In order to guard against unwholesome thoughts from entering our minds we need mindfulness. So the second s?la or the restraint of the sense faculties is undertaken by mindfulness. By mindfulness one tries not to take the signs, not to apprehend the signs, and not to apprehend the particulars. One tries to just stop at seeing, hearing and so on.
   In paragraph 101 ：When not undertaken thus, virtue of P??imokkha restraint；, a word is missing there, ：restraint also is unenduring.； If we do not undertake the restraint of sense faculties with mindfulness, then the virtue of the first one, the P??imokkha restraint, cannot endure long, cannot last long.
   ：It does not last, like a crop not fenced in with branches. And it is raided by the robber defilements as a village with open gates is by thieves.； So the P??imokkha restraint becomes enduring when the restraint of sense faculties is undertaken by mindfulness. When we apply mindfulness and try not to take the signs and particulars of objects, then we will not come to transgression of the rules in the P??imokkha.
   With regard to the restraint of the sense faculties the story of the Elder Vang?sa was given. He went out for alms and saw a woman. He had thoughts of lust arise in his mind. He asked Venerable ?nanda what to do. The Venerable ?nanda said that because you perceived mistakenly, because you saw the person as a woman these kind of thoughts arose. So try to concentrate on the formations as alien, as suffering, as not self. If you have this attitude, this understanding, you can extinguish this fire of lust in your mind. So the Elder expelled lust from his mind and went on with his alms round.
   Two more stories are given. These are inspiring stories about how monks control their senses. One monk did not know that there was a painting in the dwelling where he lived. The same monk did not know who bowed down to him, the king or the queen. The monk always said, ：May the king be happy.； to whoever bowed down to him. 
   In paragraph 108 ：Let him not be hungry-eyed.； The P??i word is lola. ．Lola・ means unsteady or looking this way and that way. That is called ．lola・. Hungry should be understood not in the sense of wanting to eat something, but hungry for the visible object.
Student: Is it in the sense of distraction?
Teacher: Yes. Monks are taught to keep their eyes down especially when they go to the village. They are allowed to see about six feet in front of them. They are to keep their eyes down. They are not to look at this thing or that thing. When your eyes are going from this thing to that thing, it is called ．lola・.
Student: ．Hungry-eyed・ is not a common English word. It is one that is seldom used.
Teacher: Maybe the word ．lola・ can be translated as hungry. Lola is something that is not steady, not composed.
   Then there is another story about the Elder Mah? Mitta. These stories are not difficult to understand.
   The third virtue for monks is livelihood purification. Livelihood purification is to be undertaken by means of energy, by means of effort because if you are lazy and if you are a monk and do not go out for alms, then your livelihood will not be pure. Livelihood purification is to be undertaken by means of effort or energy. In order to keep livelihood pure a monk has to avoid wrong search or unsuitable search. In order not to resort to such things, a monk has to go out for alms every day.
   In paragraph 112 it says, ：And if he has got putrid urine with mixed gall nuts...； Actually this is gall nuts soaked in urine. It is not necessarily putrid urine, although the P??i word ．p|ti・ is used here. It can just be urine, especially cow urine. Do you know gall nut? I don・t know. The other name is myrobalam. It is a kind of fruit or nut. It has a bitter taste. When it is soaked in cow urine, it is supposed to be medicinal.
   If a person gets that kind of gall nut or myrobalam or the four sweets, they are supposed to be medicine for monks. The one is not so good, but the four sweets are good things. He who wants to keep his livelihood pure should keep what is not good and give what is good to others.
   The four sweets are medicinal sweets made of four ingredients. What are the four? In our countries, in Buddhist countries this is very common. Almost everybody knows at least what things monks can eat in the afternoon. These four sweet things are ghee, honey, oil and molasses. They are mixed. If you are strict, you are not to cook them. You may put them in the sun and stir them. Some time later the mixture becomes a little thick. That could be eaten in the afternoon if you are weak or if there is some ailment to be gotten rid of. The four sweets are called ．catumadhura・. 
Student: This last part means that if you are offered both of these medicines and you take the bad tasting one and leave the good tasting medicine for others, that is a virtuous act.
Teacher: That・s right. Such a monk is called ．supreme in the Noble Ones・ heritage・.
   Some kinds of hinting or indicating is allowed with regard to some requisites and is not allowed with regard to other requisites. In paragraph 113 it talks about that. ：As to robe and the other requisites, no hint, indication, roundabout talk, or intimation, about robes and alms food is allowable for a bhikkhu who is purifying his livelihood.； A monk must not ask for requisites, not even hint or indicate, or use roundabout talk to get a robe or to get food.
   ：But a hint, indication, or roundabout talk, about a resting place ( a dwelling place) is allowable for one who has not taken up ascetic practices.； This is allowable for monks with regard to dwelling place.
   ：herein, a ．hint・ is when one who is getting the preparing of the ground etc., done for the purpose of (making) a resting place is asked: ．What is being done, venerable sir? Who is having it done? And he replies, ．No one・.； That means there is no one who is going to build this place. So if you can, please build. It is something like that.
Student: If you can -
Teacher: If you can, please build this place for me.
   ： An ．indication・ is saying ．Lay follower where do you live?・ ．In a mansion, venerable sir・. ．But, lay follower, is a mansion not allowed for monks・?； A mansion is allowed for monks. Is it not allowed for monks? You live in a mansion and I live in a hut. That is indication.
   ： ．Roundabout talk・ is saying ．The resting place for the community of bhikkhus is crowded・.； The monastery is too small. It is not enough for monks or lay people to assemble. That is roundabout talk. That means the monk wants a new monastery or an extension to the monastery.
   These are allowed with regard to resting place or dwelling place. With regard to robes and alms food they are not allowed.
   ：All, however, is allowed in the case of medicine.； Medicine is a necessity. If you have an ailment or a disease, you really need medicine. So with regard to medicine hinting and all these others are allowed. 
   ：But when the disease is cured, is it or is it not allowed to use the medicine obtained in this way?； There is a difference of opinion with regard to this. Vinaya specialists say that it is all right, but Suttanta specialists say no. Vinaya specialists say that Buddha has permitted and so it is all right to use medicine obtained by hinting and others even after the disease is cured. The Suttanta specialists say no, although there is no offense (That means there is no breaking of a certain rule.) nevertheless the livelihood is sullied, therefore it is not allowable. If you want to purify your livelihood to the utmost, do not use them.
   This has to be undertaken by means of understanding. You have to reflect, ．I use the robe just to ward off heat, cold, bites of insects・ and so on. You have to use your understanding. Therefore it is to be undertaken by means of understanding. 
   Now paragraph 124 ：Herein, reviewing is of two kinds: at the time of receiving requisites and at the time of using them.； Sometimes you may receive a robe today, but perhaps you do not use it until a month later. So there are two kinds of reviewing at receiving and at the time of using.
   ：For use is blameless in one who at the time of receiving robes, etc., reviews them either as (mere) elements or as repulsive.； Here also the translation is a little inaccurate. Here what is meant is when the monk receives the robe and others, he reflects or reviews them as mere elements or as repulsive. Then he puts them aside and later makes use of them. He does not just put them aside for later use, but he puts them aside and later makes use of them.
   ：And in one who reviews them thus at the time of using them； - that means you have to review both at the time of receiving and at the time of using. This passage may imply that if you review at the time of receiving and if you do not review at the time when you are using, it is alright. However the emphasis here must be on reviewing at both times - both at the time of receiving and at the time when you make use of them.
   ：Here is an explanation to settle the matter. There are four kinds of use: use as theft, use as debt, use as inheritance, use as a master. Herein, use by one who is unvirtuous and makes use (of requisites), even sitting in the midst of the community, is called ．use by theft・.； ．Unvirtuous・ really means a monk who has broken one of the four most important rules. If a monk breaks one of the four most important rules, he is no longer a monk. He may be wearing robes. He may be claiming to be a monk. His use of requisites is said to be by theft. He is not entitled to receive the offerings given by lay people. So it is like stealing something. It is called ．use as theft・. ．Unvirtuous・ here refers to a person who is no longer a monk.
   ：Use without reviewing by one who is virtuous is ．use as a debt・.； Monks depend on lay people for these requisites. Lay people offer these requisites to monks. Therefore monks have the responsibility to reflect or to review on these four requisites. If a monk does not review when accepting them or using them, then he is said to be ．using them as a debt・ or he is indebted.
   He must review the four requisites. When? The robe should be reviewed every time that you use it. Every time that you pick up your robe, then you have to review the robe. ：I use the robe just to ward off heat, cold, bites of insects； and so on.
   ：The alms food (should be reviewed) lump by lump.； What do you call this? A morsel? So alms food should be reviewed at every morsel, at every mouthful. That is why talking while eating is discouraged for monks. A monk who talks while eating is supposed to be of bad behaviour because instead of reviewing, he is speaking. When he is speaking, he is losing reviewing.
Student: During the chanting before our meals we say the first portion is for precepts, the second portion is for sam?dhi and the third is to save all beings.
Teacher: Yes. Good. You have to be doing something while eating. I mean thinking of something. When you eat without reviewing, you are using the food as a debt. So alms food should be reviewed lump by lump. ：One who cannot do this, should review it before the meal (That means in the morning.), after the meal, in the first watch, in the middle watch, and in the last watch. If dawn breaks on him without his having reviewed it, he finds himself in the position of one who has used it as a debt.； Dawn is the beginning of one day. The new day does not begin at midnight. The day is reckoned by dawn. When dawn breaks and a monk does not review at all, then he is said to be using the requisites as a debt.
   ：Also the resting place should be reviewed each time it is used.； When you go into the monastery and when you go out of the monastery, you must review. 
   ：Recourse to mindfulness both in the accepting and the use of medicine is proper.； So with regard to medicine you have to review both accepting it and making use of it.
   ：But while this is so, though there is an offense for one who uses it without mindfulness after mindful acceptance, there is no offense for one who is mindful in using after accepting without mindfulness.； You may accept it without reviewing, but when you are using, you must really review it. That is what is meant here. 
   ：Purification is of four kinds: purification by Teaching, purification by restraint, purification by search, and purification by reviewing.； This also has to do with the four virtues or four s?las. The first is purification by Teaching. The word ．Teaching・ is not correct here. 
   There are two English translations of the Visuddhi Magga. One was made by a Burmese gentleman and the other by Venerable N??amoli. Both of them did not get the right translation here. 
   The P??i word here is desan?. The word ．desan?・ generally means a sermon, or a teaching, or a preaching. But here desan? is used in a technical sense in Vinaya. ．Desan?・ in Vinaya means revealing, or revealing one・s offenses, or confession. So it is purification by confession. When a monk has broken a rule or rules, he confesses it to another monk. When he confesses, he gets free from the offense of breaking that rule.
   There is a kind of s?la which is called ．purification by confession・. Just by confession you can get rid of this offense. These are minor rules in the P??imokkha. For example cutting a tree - monks are not allowed to cut trees. If a monk cuts a tree, or plucks a flower, or picks a fruit, he comes to a minor offense. In order to get free from that minor offense he just has to confess it to another monk.
   There are some graver offenses which need not only confession, but which require staying under probation for a period of time. Also there are the gravest offenses which cause a person not to be a monk. In that case ．giving up robes・ is called a purification. Giving up being a monk is what i mean. Becoming a s?ma?era (a novice) or becoming a lay person is called a ．purification・ there. So offenses incurred with regard to P??imokkha rules can be purified by confession. 
   ．Purification by restraint・ is restraint of sense faculties. That is called ．purification by restraint・.
   The third one, ．purification by livelihood・, is called ．purification by search・. That is because you have to search for requisites, especially food. ．Search for・ means to find by suitable means, not by asking, or begging by word of mouth.
   The last one is ．purification by reviewing・. In order to purify the last of the four s?las, you review whenever you receive a requisite or when you make use of a requisite. These are the four purifications corresponding to the four s?las.
   ：Use of the requisites by the seven kinds of Trainers is called ．use as inheritance・.； Do you know what are Trainers? You know that there are eight Noble Persons or eight kinds of Noble Persons. There are four stages of enlightenment and eight types of consciousness that arise at the four stages of enlightenment. They are the Path of Stream-Entrant, the Fruition of Stream-Entrant, the Path of Once-Returner, the Fruition of Once-Returner, The Path of No?-Returner, the Fruition of Non-Returner, the Path of Arahant, the Fruition of Arahant. These are the eight types of consciousness. It is said that there are eight Enlightened Persons or eight Noble Persons. In P??i the word is Ariya. You may be familiar with the word ．ariyan・. The person at the moment of Stream-Entrant Path consciousness is called the ．First Noble Person・. The person at the moment of Stream-Entrant Fruition is called the ．Second Noble Person・ and so on. There are eight kinds of Noble Persons. 
   What are Trainers? ．Trainers・ here means those who have attained to the lower stages of enlightenment. Briefly Trainers are those who are not ordinary persons (puthujjanas) nor Arahants. They are Stream-Entrants, Once-Returners, Non-Returners, (and the Arahant at the moment of path consciousness only). In P??i they are called ．Sekhas・. They are not puthujjanas or ordinary persons. And they are not Arahants. Their use of the requisites is called ．use as an inheritance・.
   ：But how then is the Blessed One・s requisites or the laity・s requisites that are used? Although given by the laity, they actually belong to the Blessed One, because it is by the Blessed One that they are permitted.； Buddha permitted us to accept things from lay people. It is virtually the requisites of the Buddha and not of the lay people. When a son makes use of his father・s belongings, his father・s requisites, he is said to be ．using them as an inheritance・. ：That is why it should be understood that the Blessed One・s requisites are used. The confirmation here is in the Dhammad?y?da Sutta.； That Sutta is in the Majjhima Nik?ya (The Middle Length Sayings) in the third Sutta. Buddha said in this Sutta, ：Be the inheritors of Dhamma and not of requisites.； Buddha urged his disciples in this way. 
   ：Use by those whose cankers are destroyed (That means those used by Arahants) is called ．use as a master・: for they make use of them as masters because they have escaped the slavery of craving.；
   From among these four try to make use as a master. That is the best one. For those ordinary people who have not yet attained any stage of enlightenment there can be no use as an inheritance and also of course as a master. So there are only two - use as theft and use as debt. But the Commentary said that the use by those who keep their precepts, who keep their virtue pure could be included in the use as inheritance because it is the opposite of the use as a debt.
   ：For one possessed of virtue is called a ．trainer・ too because of possessing this training.； This is stretching the meaning of the word. The word ．Trainer・ or the P??i word ．Sekha・ means persons that are neither puthujjanas nor Arahants, but here with the stretching of the meaning, a person who has good s?la , although he is a puthujjana, can be called a ．trainer・ here. Use of requisites can be included as use as inheritance.
   ：As regards these three kinds of use, since use as a master is best, when a bhikkhu undertakes virtue dependent on requisites, he should aspire to that and use them after reviewing them in the way described. There is one sentence missing here. I don・t know why he left it out. ：For he who so does is one who does what is to be done.； That sentence is missing.
Student: That comes where?
Teacher: After ．in the way described・. ：For who so acts (I think it is better to say ．acts・.) is one who does what is to be done.；
   In paragraph 130 ：In connection with the fulfilling of the virtue dependent on requisites there should be told the story of the novice Sa~gharakkhita, the Nephew.； He was eating and his Preceptor said, ：Don・t let your tongue burn.； Or ：Don・t burn your tongue.； He was not eating hot food at that moment. Still the Preceptor said, ：Don・t burn your tongue.； That means don・t eat without reviewing. He became an Arahant later.
   In paragraph 131 about the middle of the paragraph it says, ：That of magnanimous ordinary men devoted to profitable things.； ．Magnanimous ordinary men・ means informed puthujjanas or good puthujjanas. ．Devoted to profitable things・ really means devoted to vipassan? meditation.
   The number of precepts given by Venerable N??amoli is different than that given in the traditional interpretation. Traditionally the number of the rules for monks is - how do I say? There are too many rules here. ：Nine thousand millions and a hundred and eighty millions, then as well, and  fifty plus a hundred thousand and thirty six again to swell. The total restraint disciplines: these rules the Enlightened One explains told under heads for filling out, which the Discipline restraint contains.； Traditionally the number is 91,805,036,000.
Student: That・s a lot. 
Teacher: That is because for one rule there are many minor offenses.
Student: It・s 91 billion.
Student: It・s 91 trillion.
Teacher: I don・t know.
Student: Million, billion, trillion. That・s right. No, it・s only billion.
Teacher: So we take pride in saying, ：I am keeping 91 billion precepts.；
   Now in paragraph 134 ：The magnanimous ordinary man・s virtue, which from the time of admission to the Order is devoid even of the stain of a (wrong) thought because of its extreme purity, like a gem of purest water.； ．Gem of purest water・ - what does that mean? It doesn・t make sense. It should be ．like a gem well-polished・. That is the meaning. It can be well-polished or well-washed.
   Then there is a story. I will skip the story. The stories are not difficult to understand.
   Then there are more stories on page 48 in paragraph 137. This is the story of a monk who broke his legs and asked the robbers to let him practice meditation for the night. He practiced meditation on pain caused by the broken bones. At dawn he became an Arahant. He meditated on the pain. Pain became his object of meditation. 
   On page 49 the quotation from Pa?isambhid? is not so easy to understand. We can skip it. ：In the case of killing living beings, (a) abandoning is virtue, (b) abstention is virtue, (c) volition is virtue, (d) restraint is virtue, (e) non-transgression is virtue.； Then the others are given one by one - ： In the case of taking what is not given, in the case of sexual misconduct, in the case of false speech；  and so on. Even in the case of first jh?na the abandoning of hindrances is virtue. In the case of second jh?na the abandoning of applied (vitakka) and sustained (vic?ra) thought is virtue and so on.
   In paragraph 141 ：And here there is no state called ．abandoning・ other than the mere non-arising of the killing of living things, etc., as stated.；  ．Abandoning・ really means not letting them arise. If they have arisen, then they have already arisen, and you cannot do anything about them.
   We come to the end of the questions and answers - ：What is Virtue? In what sense is it virtue?； and so on.
   ：What is the defiling of it?； and ：What is the cleansing of it?； Monks are exhorted to keep rules very intact, to keep their s?la very pure. The ideal state is that the precepts are not broken anywhere. That is explained here.
   ：When a man has broken the training course at the beginning or at the end in any instance of the seven classes of offenses, his virtue is called ．torn・, like a cloth that is cut at the edge.； His virtue should be untorn. If it is broken at the beginning or at the end, it is called ．torn s?la・. 
   ：But when he has broken it in the middle, it is called ．rent・, like a cloth that is rent in the middle. When he has broken it twice or thrice in succession, it is called ．blotched・, like a cow whose body is some such color as black or red with a discrepant color appearing on the back or the belly. When he has broken it (all over) at intervals, it is called ．mottled・, like a cow speckled (all over) with discrepant-colored spots at intervals. This in the first place is how there comes to be tornness the breach that has gain, etc., as its cause.；
   ：And likewise with the seven bonds of sexuality； - it means the seven kinds of engagements in sexuality. ：here, brahman, some ascetic or brahman claims to lead the life of purity rightly.； It is a little inaccurate. It should say ．some ascetic or brahman claiming to lead the life of purity rightly but does not.・ It should go like that. ：Some ascetic or brahman claiming to lead the life of purity rightly but does not enter into actual sexual intercourse with women. Yet he agrees to massage, manipulation, bathing and rubbing down by women.・ In our country these are called ．minor sexuality・. It is not sexual intercourse, but they pertain to sexuality. So these seven things, massage etc. are called ．minor sexuality・. Although a person may not break the rule which forbids sexual intercourse, if he is thinking of this, then his s?la is said to be ．impure・. It is not broken, but it becomes impure because he is thinking of these things. He is taking delight in massage etc. being done to him. This is a kind of sexuality. These things are called ．minor sexuality・ in our country. If we want to keep s?la pure, then we must avoid doing these things too. 
   In paragraph 154 about the middle ：owing to that unvirtuousness he is ugly as hemp cloth. Contact with him is painful because those who fall in with his views； - ．fall in with his views・, what is that?  What does that mean?
Student: To agree with him.
Teacher: The P??i word means to imitate him, to follow his conduct. Sometimes the P??i words can be misleading if you do not know the exact formation of these words. The P??i word here is di??h?nugati. It could be di??hi?nugati or di??h?nugati. It really is di??h?nugati and not di??hi?nugati. Venerable N??amoli took it to be di??hi?nugati. That・s why you see the word ．view・ here. ．Di??hi・ means wrong view. Actually the P??i word is to be separated as di??h? ?nugati. ．Di??h?・ means what is seenand ．?nugati・ means following. So following what is seen - that means following his conduct. Is there a good word for that?
Student: Imitating.
Teacher: So ：Those imitating his conduct are brought to long-lasting suffering in the states of loss.；
   ：He is like a log from a pyre.；  The reference is not 99 but 90.
   Paragraph 155, do you understand that passage?  ：Now the Blessed One has shown that when the unvirtuous have their minds captured by pleasure and satisfaction in the indulgence of the five cords of sense-desires, in (receiving) salutation, in being honored, etc., the result of that kamma, directly visible in all ways, is very violent pain, with that (kamma) as its condition, capable of producing a gush of hot blood by causing agony of the heart with the mere recollection of it.；
   I have a fresh translation of that. ：Now the Blessed One who has directly seen the result of kamma in all ways (Buddha has seen kamma and its results in all ways.) and wanting to show the very bitter pain to be experienced by unvirtuous persons whose minds are captured by pleasure and satisfaction mentioned above has said: (Then what kind of pain?) pain which is caused by pleasure and satisfaction in the indulgence of the five cords of sensual desires (When a person indulges in these sensual desires, then there will come pain.)caused by pleasure and satisfaction in receiving salutation.；  Suppose that I am a monk and I have broken the most important rules. Actually I am not a monk at all, but I claim myself to be a monk. Then I receive salutation and bowing down from lay people. As a result of that, I may suffer in hell or in the woeful states. ：Caused by pleasure and satisfaction in receiving salutations or being honored, etc., the result of that kamma directly visible in all ways, is very violent pain, with that kamma as condition, capable of producing a gush of hot blood by causing agony of heart with the mere recollection of unvirtuousness.； Suppose I am unvirtuous. When i think of my unvirtuousness, I will have remorse and depression. This can cause me to vomit blood. So it is capable of producing a gush of hot blood by causing agony of the heart, just by mere recollection of unvirtuousness. This kind of pain, very bitter pain, is to be experienced by those who are unvirtuous and whose minds are captured by pleasure and satisfaction mentioned above. It is to be translated that way although it is a little odd.
***Devoid of Say?daw・s explanations I believe the fresh translation is the following: ：Now the Blessed One who has directly seen the result of kamma in all ways and wanting to show the very bitter pain to be experienced by unvirtuous persons whose minds are captured by pleasure and satisfaction mentioned above has said: pain which is caused by pleasure and satisfaction in the indulgence of the five cords of sensual desires caused by pleasure and satisfaction in receiving salutation, or being honored, etc., the result of that kamma, directly visible in all ways, is very violent pain, with that kamma as condition, capable of producing a gush of hot blood by causing agony of heart with the mere recollection of unvirtuousness."***
   In paragraph 158 one word is missing. The word ．therefore・ should stand at the head of the paragraph. It should read ：Therefore, what pleasure has a man of broken virtue； and so on. The advantage of being virtuous and the disadvantage of being unvirtuous, these two are given here.
   Towards the end of the verses ：He is not free from any sort of terror；. It could be translated as ：any sort of danger；.  In the fourth line of this paragraph it says, ：He is well set upon the road to hell；. If all the woeful states are meant by hell, it would be all right. Here what is meant is not hell only, but the other woeful states also. There are four woeful states.
   In paragraph 159 midway through the verses ：There are no cankers here and now；. It should say ：There are no dangers here and now； not ．cankers・. ：there are no dangers here and now to plague the virtuous man at all.；  
   I think that is it for the first chapter. You have seen that mostly virtue for monks or precepts for monks is what is treated mostly in this chapter. Some advice is applicable to the virtue of lay people and also to nuns and so on. Much is only for monks. For lay persons the keeping of five precepts is just enough. Buddha said that a person who claims himself to be a disciple of the Buddha should keep his moral conduct pure. That means he should keep five precepts. If you take five precepts before going to practice meditation, that is all right. 
   For lay people it is easier to have purification of morals, purity of moral conduct, than monks. Monks have disadvantage here. Monks have so many rules to keep. If they have broken some rules and they do not get rid of these offenses, then that state can be a block to their concentration and progress. They must do confession or if the offenses are graver, they must do something like living under probation for some period of time. It is not so easy for monks to have complete purity of morals as it is for lay people. For lay people although they may have broken rules in the past, before practice of meditation if they take precepts and mean seriously to keep them, that is enough for them. Purity of morals for the practice of meditation is easier for lay people than for monks.
   OK. Any questions?
Student: So why does anyone want to become a monk?
Teacher: A monk has fewer things to worry about. Monks have more time to devote to the study and practice. That is why I said in one of the talks that those monks who study the Visuddhi Magga either give up their robes or go into the forest and practice meditation.
   Next week we go to ascetic practices. 

                                     S?dhu!    S?dhu!    S?dhu!





