Chapter 5
(Tape 12)

   Today we will do two chapters, chapter five and chapter six because both chapters are small chapters, not like the fourth chapter. The fourth chapter is a long chapter. Up to the end of the fourth chapter we have studied how a person practices the first of the kasi?a meditation subjects. That is the earth kasi?a meditation up to the attainment of jh?nas. Then we will look at the person who makes the jh?nas a basis for vipassan? and practices vipassan? meditation on them and becomes an Arahant. Only the jh?nas are mentioned here, not vipassan? in this chapter. 
   The four jh?nas - first, second, third, fourth - are explained in detail in the fourth chapter. That is the four jh?nas or five jh?nas that are attained through the practice of earth kasi?a meditation are explained.
   You may remember that there are ten kasi?a objects for meditation mentioned earlier at the beginning of chapter four. Chapter five deals with the remaining kasi?a objects of meditation. We have the earth kasi?a in chapter four. In chapter five we will have the remaining nine kasi?as.
   The next kasi?a is the water kasi?a. The word ．kasi?a・ cannot be translated into English. It is very difficult. For the sake of convenience we translate it as disk meditation. Not all the kasi?a objects are disks however. So we will just leave it untranslated and use the word ．kasi?a・. ．Kasi?a・ means whole or orb. When you practice with the kasi?a, you take the whole of the object, not just part of the object. That is why it is called ．kasi?a・. In P??i ．kasi?a・ means whole or orb.
   Now we want to practice water kasi?a. What should we do? ：One who wants to develop the water kasi?a should, as in the case of the earth kasi?a, seat himself comfortably and apprehend the sign in water that is ．either made up or not made up・.； Water kasi?a can be practiced without a made up kasi?a. One may just look at water and practice water kasi?a meditation on it. That is for those who had experience in the past, especially in past lives. For those who have not had previous experience, they will have to make a water kasi?a.
   ：Someone with no such previous practice should guard against the four faults of a kasi?a.； That means the water should be clear water or colorless. It should not be red or yellow, but it should be clear water. ．The four faults of a kasi?a・ means it should not be mixed with color. If it is mixed with color, it will become color kasi?a and not water kasi?a. The water has to be pure and clean.
   ：He should fill a bowl or a four-footed water pot (something like a kettle) to the brim with water uncontaminated by soil, taken in the open through a clean cloth [strainer], or with any other clear unturbid water. He should put it in a screened place on the outskirts of the monastery as already described and seat himself comfortably. He should neither review its color nor bring its characteristic to mind.； That means he should not reflect on its color because it will be color kasi?a and not water kasi?a. You should not reflect on the characteristic of water. Water has the characteristic of cohesion. Here you are to take water as a concept, not as a reality.
   ：He should neither review its color nor bring its characteristic to mind, apprehending the color as belonging to its physical support.； Clear is a kind of color. One should not pay attention to it although one may be seeing it. It is like the earth kasi?a. You may be seeing the earth or the color of the earth,  but you do not reflect on it. You do not keep your mind on the color of the earth but on the earth itself. In the same way here even though there may be some color in the water, you do not pay attention to color, but you pay attention to the substance called ．water・.
   ：He should set his mind on the [name] concept as the most outstanding mental datum, and using any among the [various] names for water (?po) such as rain (ambu), liquid (udaka), dew (v?ri), fluid (salila), he should develop [the kasi?a] by using [preferably] the obvious ．water, water・.； Then the footnote states: ：English cannot really furnish five words for water.； In P??i there are many synonyms for water. The author tells us you can say any of the words.
Student: You shouldn・t switch words. You should just focus on one word.
Teacher: that・s right.
Student: The water should be very still?
Teacher: Yes. 
   In English we just say ．water, water・ or you could say ．liquid, liquid・ or you could say some other thing. ．Water・ is the word that comes to us naturally when we see the substance.
Student: so this is similar to mantra practice.
Teacher: It is something like that, but the meditator does not concentrate on the sound ．water・. He concentrates on the substance, on the concept. That is the difference.
   Then he develops the kasi?a looking at the water and then closing his eyes trying to visualize it, and then he looks at the water again like the meditator did with the earth kasi?a. Then he gets first jh?na, second jh?na and so on as with the earth kasi?a.
   Here the learning sign and the counterpart sign - ：If the water has bubbles of froth mixed with it, the learning sign has the same appearance.； If there are bubbles of water, or froth, or whatever the learning sign is the same as that because the learning sign is the exact image of the real thing. After you get the learning sign  or the grasped sign, you may go to any place and sit down and concentrate on that visualized or memorized image. Then the faults in the learning sign will gradually disappear and it will become very clear. 
   ：The learning sign has the same appearance, and it is evident as a fault in the kasi?a. But the counterpart sign appears inactive (That means still.), like a crystal fan set in space, like the disk of a looking-glass made of crystal. With the appearance of that sign he reaches access jh?na (That is neighborhood jh?na.) and the jh?na tetrad and pentad in the way already described.； He dwells upon the counterpart sign again and again and gets jh?na - first jh?na, second jh?na, third jh?na, fourth jh?na, or five jh?nas. That means if he eliminates vitakka and vic?ra at the same time, there are four jh?nas. If he eliminates the jh?na factors one at a time, then there are five jh?nas. 
   The remaining kasi?as are pretty much the same. With fire kasi?a you look at some fire. ：Herein, when someone with merit, having had previous practice, is apprehending the sign, it arises in him in any sort of fire, not made up, as he looks at the fiery combustion in a lamp・s flame or in a furnace, or in a place for baking bowls, or in a forest conflageration, as in the Elder Cittagutta・s case.； 
   ：The sign arose as he was looking at a lamp・s flame while he was in the Uposatha house on the day of preaching the Dhamma. Anyone else should make one up.； If a person has no practice previously, he will have to make a fire kasi?a.
   One should build a fire. ：He should make a hole a span and four fingers wide in a rush mat or a piece of leather or a cloth.； You make a hole. It may be about ten inches in diameter. Then you look at the fire through that hole. You say ．fire, fire, fire・. There are different synonyms for fire. You may take any of those. In the same way the learning sign and the counterpart sign will appear to you. You dwell on the counterpart sign and jh?na will arise. Then first, second, third and fourth jh?na will come.
   Then there is the air kasi?a. How do we practice the air kasi?a? A yogi should practice air kasi?a by looking at something or by feeling. When you look at a tree shaking in the wind, you see that that is wind. That is air. Or as it is said in this book you may sit near a window and feel the wind touching your body. You may concentrate on that feeling of air touching your body or the movement of air in the treetops. There are two ways that you can practice air kasi?a meditation. Then you can say any one of the synonyms for wind or air. In English it is just air.
   ：Here the learning sign appears to move like the swirl of hot [steam] on rice gruel just withdrawn from an oven. The counterpart sign is quiet and motionless.； The counterpart sign is always like that. It is more refined, smoother, and maybe more brilliant, but the learning sign is just the exact image of the object. 
   Next is the blue kasi?a. The P??i word for blue is n?la. This word means more than just blue. For example it can mean black. Hair is said to be n?la in color. Maybe not the color of the hair of Western people. I see many hair colors here. It is like the hair of Eastern people, black. In Burma we translate n?la not as blue but as brown. Between brown and black we translate as n?la. A lotus which is called ．blue lotus・ in Burmese we call it ．brown lotus・ although it is blue.
Student: Could it be green?
Teacher: Yes, if it is very dark. So here we have any color bordering on blue - blue, or maybe dark green, or something like black.
   ：One who is learning the blue kasi?a apprehends the sign in blue, whether in a flower, or in a cloth, or in a color element.； ．Color element・ simply means paint. You may paint on a board blue color and practice on it.
   ：One should take flowers such as blue lotuses, girika??ik? (morning glory) flowers, etc., and spread them out to fill a tray or a flat basket completely so that no stamen or stalk shows, or with only their petals. Or he can fill it with blue cloth bunched up together; or he can fasten the cloth over the rim of the tray or basket like the covering of a drum. Or he can make a kasi?a disk, either portable as described under the earth kasi?a or on a wall, with one of the color elements such as bronze-green, leaf-green, anjana-ointment black.； Anjana-ointment is the cosmetic women use to decorate their eyes. What do you call that?
Students: Eye shadow. Mascara.
Teacher: Yes, mascara. It can be any color?
Student: It・s usually dark.
Teacher: Yes, it must be dark. So any one of these colors will do. He surrounds it with a different color. Let us say you want to make a blue kasi?a. The circle should be blue and the bordering color should not be red, yellow or white, but some other color. There should be no confusion with the colors of the other kasi?as. ：After that he should bring it to mind as ．blue, blue・.； He looks at it and says ．blue, blue・. The rrest is similar to the preceding kasi?a objects.
   With the yellow kasi?a one uses a yellow cloth, yellow flowers or yellow paint. The only difference is the color. 
   With the red kasi?a you use red color - red flowers, red cloth or red paint. With white kasi?a you use white flowers, white cloth or white paint.
   Next is the light kasi?a. ：One who is learning the light kasi?a apprehends the sign in light in a hole in a wall, or in a keyhole, or in a window opening.； So it is light coming through a hole.
   ：So firstly, when someone has merit, having had previous practice, the sign arises in him when he sees the circle thrown on a wall or a floor by sunlight or moonlight entering through a hole in the wall, etc., or when he sees a circle thrown on the ground by sunlight or moonlight coming through a gap in the branches of a dense-leafed tree or through a gap in a hut made of closely packed branches. Anyone else should use that same kind of circle of luminosity just described, developing it as ．luminosity, luminosity, or ．light, light・. If he cannot do so, he can light a lamp inside a pot, close the pot・s mouth, make a hole in it and place it with the hole facing a wall. The lamplight coming out of the hole throws a circle on the wall.； He looks at that circle and says ．light, light・.
   ：This lasts longer than the other kinds.； That means that sunlight or moonlight may change. They may not last long, but this light which is put in a pot and that falls on the wall will last longer.
   ：The learning sign is like the circle thrown on the wall or the ground. The counterpart sign is like a compact bright cluster of lights. The rest is as before.； 
   The last one is the limited space kasi?a. Here ．limited space・ is said to differentiate it from ．infinite space・ which is the object of the first formless (ar|p?vacara) jh?na. After getting the fifth or the fourth jh?na, if a person wants to attain ar|p?vacara jh?na, first he has to practice the kasi?a meditation. Then he makes the sign disappear and he dwells on the space that was taken by the sign. Then he expands this sign until the end of the world or the end of the universe.
   But here the yogi takes the space which is limited. It is like looking at a round hole or something like that. ：One who is learning the space kasi?a apprehends the sign in a hole in a wall, or in a keyhole, or in a window opening, and so firstly, when someone has merit, having had previous practice, the sign arises in him when he sees any [such gap as a] hole in a wall. Anyone else should make hole a span and four fingers broad in a well thatched hut, or in a piece of leather, or in a rush mat, and so on. He should develop one of these, or a hole such as a hole in a wall, as ．space, space・.； So he looks at the hole and says ．space, space・.
   ：Here the learning sign resembles the hole together with the wall.； So there is a limit. There is a boundary. That is why in that state attempts to expand it fail. You cannot expand that in the mind because it has a limited boundary.
   ：The counterpart sign appears only as a circle of space.； Here there is no boundary, just a circle of space, and so attempts to extend it succeed. ：The rest should be understood as described under the earth kasi?a.；
   These are the ten ksi?as. All of the ten kasi?as lead a yogi to attain all four jh?nas or all five jh?nas.
   The following is general but I think it is the interesting part of this chapter. We will learn what results we can get from the jh?nas based on the practice of kasi?a meditation.
   You know in the book many miracles are stated like flying through the air, going into the earth, creating storms or fire. They may be called ．psychic powers・ now. In order to get those powers first one has to attain all eight or nine jh?nas, not only r|p?vacara jh?nas but also ar|p?vacara jh?nas also. Then one goes back to the fourth or the fifth jh?na and practices in a special way so that the supernormal power or ．direct knowledge・ as it is called in this book arises in that person. When the direct knowledge arises as that person wishes, he is able to see things far away, he is able to hear sounds far away and so on. Then there are monks who show their psychic power.
   Suppose you want to shake this whole building. What must you do? Suppose you have power. If you go about it in the wrong way, you will not be able to do that. In order to shake this building you must practice jh?na taking water kasi?a as an object. If you develop jh?na on earth kasi?a, it will become stronger and you will not be able to shake it. In order to shake this building you have to practice jh?na on water kasi?a. Water is fluid. If you develop direct knowledge, you will be able to do that. Things like this are mentioned in the following paragraphs. They are interesting. 
Student: In order to get those psychic powers one has to attain all eight jh?nas? 
Teacher: Yes.
Student: Then one comes back to the fourth jh?na and concentrates on that in a special way. 
Teacher: Yes. This will be explained later in chapter 13.
Student: You want to shake this building?
Teacher: It is interesting. There is a story of a novice. It is said that he had psychic powers. He went up to the world of the gods and he said: ：I will show my power to you. I will shake your buildings, your mansions so that you will become afraid.； He tried to do that, but he was not successful. He couldn・t shake them at all. The celestial nymphs teased him and he went back ashamed. Then he returned to his teacher and told him that he tried to shake the celestial mansion and he was unable to do that. His teacher said to him that he got into the wrong jh?na meditation. He had practiced jh?na on the earth kasi?a. So he could not shake the mansion. Then he went up again. Once again the nymphs teased him. But this time their king said: ：Do not tease him. Now he has instructions from his teacher.； So that time he was able to shake the celestial mansion.
   These supernormal powers are mentioned in the following paragraphs. The first is the results of the earth kasi?a. ：The earth kasi?a is the basis for such powers as the state described as ．having become one, he becomes many・ (That means you make multiple images of yourself.), etc.；  Let me read about etc. ：Being one he becomes many, or having become many he becomes one again. He becomes visible or invisible. He goes feeling no obstruction through the further side of a wall, or a rampart, or a hill as if through air. He penetrates up and down through the solid ground as if through water. He walks on water without breaking through as if on solid ground. He travels cross-legged in the sky like the birds on wing. Even the moon and the sun so potent, so mighty though they be, does he touch and feel with his hand. He reaches in the body even up to the heaven of Brahma.； Such things can be done through direct knowledge.
   ：Stepping or standing or sitting on space or on water by creating earth, and the acquisition of the bases of mastery (Those are the jh?nas again, the developed jh?nas.) by the limited and measureless method.；
   ：The water kasi?a is the basis for such powers as diving in and out of the earth.； So if you want to dive into the earth, first you enter into water kasi?a and something like create water in your mind so that you can get into the earth. ：Causing rain storms, creating rivers and seas, making the earth, and rocks, and palaces quake； - if you want to read the references I can give you the page numbers. For D.1,78 the English translation is Dialogues of the Buddha, volume 1, page 88. For M.2,13 the English translation is Middle length Sayings, volume 2, page 213.
Student: The footnote says ：Sense desires are not called empty (ritta) in the sense that space, which is entirely devoid of individual essence, is called empty.； So sense desires are not empty?
Teacher: Right. Emptiness in Therav?da teaching is different. Whenever we say ．empty・, we mean it as empty or devoid of permanency, devoid of happiness, devoid of self. It is not that they do not have an existence of their own because desire is a reality (paramattha). It is an ultimate reality. Desire is a mental factor. So it has its own existence or entity. But it is free or void of permanency. It is void of happiness (sukha). It is void of self or ego. So it is called void or su??a. It is different.
Student: It is empty in that it is going to change, in that it is not permanent. It is empty in that sense. 
Teacher: yes.
Student: It is not empty in that it has momentary existence.
Teacher: Yes. It has momentary existence.
Student: Space does not even have momentary existence.
Teacher: Space is not included in the realities. Space is considered to be a concept, space and time. 
Student: Is your description of sense desire different from Mah?yana?
Teacher: I don・t know what ．su??a・ means in Mah?yana. If it means that sense desire has no existence at all, that it is something like a concept, then it is different. What we understand by su??a is that it is devoid of permanency and so on. But it has its own existence, momentary existence. It arises and disappears. During that moment it is real. So it is called reality, but this reality has no quality of permanency and so on, no substance.
   ：The fire kasi?a is the basis for such powers as smoking, flaming, causing showers of sparks, countering fire with fire, ability to burn only what one wants to burn, causing light for the purpose of seeing visible objects with the divine eye, burning up the body by means of the fire element at the time of attaining Nibb?na.；
   The ability to burn only what one wants to burn is to be found in the Sa?yutta Nik?ya. In the translation it is to be found in Kindred Sayings, volume 4, page 196. (In Bhikkhu Bodhi・s more recent translation it is in The Connected Discourses of the Buddha, volume 2, pages 1319 & 1320.) There a monk did that.
   ：The Venerable Mahaka went to his lodging and shut the bolt of the door, performed such a feat of magic power such that a flame came through the keyhole and the parts about and the parts about the door bar, and set the grass on fire, but not the cloak. Citta the householder in alarm with hair on end shook out his cloak and stood aside.； So here the venerable showed his psychic power. The cloak did not burn but the grass burned. That is what is said here. This is the ability to burn only what one wants to burn. 
   This fire kasi?a is very useful in trying to see things with the divine eye. The divine eye is one kind of direct knowledge. In order to see far away things or to see things in the dark one needs some light. So first he practices jh?na based on the fire kasi?a. Then he goes to the fifth jh?na and so on.
   ．Burning up the body by means of the fire element at the time of Nibb?na・ - that means when an Arahant dies if he has this power, he could will that the body be consumed by fire when he dies. Nobody has to take care of burning his body. It will burn by itself. In order to do that before his death he enters into jh?na on the basis of fire kasi?a. Then he wills ：May my body burn at death.； 
   That was done by one of the disciples of the Buddha. His name was Venerable Bakkula. He was foremost among those that are free from disease. He was endowed with perfect health. Before he died he thought ：I have not given any duty or any burden to anybody in my life. So when I die, I will not give them this burden of cremating my body. Let my body cremate itself.； So he willed that way and then he died. As soon as he died, the body was consumed by fire. The moment he died the body was burned.
   ：The air kasi?a is the basis for such powers as going with the speed of the wind, causing wind storms. The blue kasi?a is the basis for such powers as creating black forms, causing darkness, acquisition of the bases of mastery by the method of fairness and ugliness, and attainment of the liberation by the beautiful. The yellow kasi?a is the basis for such powers as creating yellow forms, resolving that something shall be gold.； You may resolve that something will be gold and then it may turn into gold or look like gold. The reference is Kindred Sayings, volume 1, page 145.
   ：The red kasi?a is the basis for such powers as creating red forms, acquisition of the bases of mastery in the way stated and attainment of the liberation by the beautiful. The white kasi?a is the basis for such powers as creating white forms, banishing stiffness and torpor (That is banishing sleepiness.), dispelling darkness, causing light for the purpose of seeing visible objects with the divine eye. The light kasi?a is the basis for such powers as creating luminous forms, banishing stiffness and torpor, dispelling darkness, causing light for the purpose of seeing visible objects with the divine eye.； The white kasi?a and the light kasi?a are almost the same.
   ：The space kasi?a is the basis for such powers as revealing the hidden, maintaining postures inside the earth and rocks by creating space inside them, traveling unobstructed through walls and so on.；
   ：The classification ．above, below, around, exclusive, measureless・ applies to all kasi?as.； They are the different aspects of the kasi?as.
   ：No kasi?a can be developed by any living being described as follows: ．Beings hindered by kamma, by defilement, or by kamma-result, who lack faith, zeal, and understanding, will be incapable of entering into the certainty of rightness in profitable states.；
   ：Hindered by bad kamma refers to those who possess bad kamma entailing immediate effect [rebirth].； It is given in the footnote that it is the five kinds of grievous kamma - killing one・s mother, killing one・s father, killing an Arahant, causing blood to congeal in the body of the Buddha, and causing schism in the Community, in the Sa~gha. These are said to be very grievous offenses. A person who has done any one of these cannot escape rebirth in hell in the next existence. It is said here that if anyone has done any of these, he will not be able to develop jh?na.
   The fourth one is important. Here it say ．intentional shedding of a Buddha・s blood・. It is believed in the Therav?da tradition that we cannot wound a Buddha. We cannot injure a Buddha. The most we can do is hit him and have the blood congeal under the skin. Sometimes you hit yourself and there is a bruise. No blood comes out. What is that?
Student: A contusion.
Teacher: That is what is meant by the P??i word ．lohitupp?da・, not injuring him, not shedding the Buddha・s blood. Buddha will not bleed.
   Then by defilement - that means those who have fixed wrong view or who are hermaphrodites or eunuchs. These people cannot attain jh?na even though they practice meditation. ．Wrong view・ means no cause view, moral inefficacy of action, and nihilist view. ．No cause view・ means there is no cause for something to happen. Anything can happen without a cause. That is called ．no cause view・. If you deny the cause, you deny the effect. In reality these three kinds of wrong view are the same.
   The others deny the effect. If you deny the effect, you also deny the cause. Then third one is the nihilist view. There is nothing. Whatever you do will not constitute a kamma. The second one is moral inefficacy of action and the third one is nihilist view - no cause, no doing. There is no result from the practice of giving; there is nothing like respect to the Elders, to parents and so on. You don・t have to pay respect to your elders, something like that. There is no this world, no other world; there are no holy men who have practiced and attained to the spiritual attainments and so on. That is what is called the ．nihilist view・ here. If a person has one of these wrong views or he is a hermaphrodite or a eunuch, he will not be able to attain jh?na.
   ：By kamma result: who have had a rebirth-linking with no [profitable] root-cause or with only two [profitable] root-causes.； That means when a person takes rebirth, there is a type of consciousness which arises. With that consciousness roots may arise. There are six roots - three good roots and three evil roots. The roots of evil are attachment, hatred and delusion. The roots of good are the opposites of these three. When a person takes rebirth, his rebirth consciousness may not be accompanied by any of these roots at all or it may be accompanied by two or three of the good roots. There is no rebirth consciousness  which is accompanied by any of the evil roots. If a person・s rebirth consciousness is not accompanied by any of these roots, then he cannot attain jh?na in that life. ．Two roots・ means non-greed and non-hatred without wisdom or understanding (???a). So our rebirth consciousness must be accompanied by pa??? in order for us to attain jh?na in this life or enlightenment in this life. Otherwise it is impossible for us to attain jh?na or enlightenment. This is called ．by kamma-result・.
   ：Lack faith: are destitute of faith in the Buddha, Dhamma and Sa~gha.； (Maybe in the practice also.)
   ：Zeal: are destitute of zeal for the Unopposed Way. Understanding: are destitute of mundane and supramundane right view.； ．Right view・ means understanding of kamma and its results. This is called ．right view・.
   ： ．Will be incapable of entering into the certainty of rightness in profitable states・ means that they are incapable of entering into the Noble Path called ．certainty・ and ．rightness in profitable states・.； That simply means such people are incapable of attaining enlightenment, attaining jh?nas.
   ：And this does not apply only to kasi?as; for none of them will succeed in developing any meditation subject at all. So the task of devotion to a meditation subject must be undertaken by a clansman who has no hindrances by kamma-result, who shuns hindrance by kamma and by defilement, and who fosters faith, zeal and understanding by listening to the Dhamma, frequenting good men, and so on.； So in order to practice successfully you should be free from these defects. This is the fifth chapter.

