Chapter 8
(Tape 15 / Ps: 1-35)

   The next meditation is mindfulness of death. Death is defined as the interruption of the life faculty included within the limits of a single becoming or a single existence. It is one life - a human life, an animal life or whatever.
   ．Interruption・ really means cessation or being cut off. So it is stoppage or cessation of the life faculty. You are familiar with the life faculty. It is j?vita. It is something which keeps our bodies alive and also there is life faculty of mind. So there are two life faculties - physical and mental.
   The first definition is what is meant here. There are other kinds of death. ：But death as termination (cutting off), in other words, the Arahant・s termination of the suffering of the round, is not intended here.； When an Arahant dies, he dies and there is no more rebirth for him. That kind of death is not meant here.
   ：Nor is momentary death； - that means at every moment there is death. There is one moment of thought and then it dies and then there is another moment of thought and so on. We are dying and being reborn every moment. That kind of death is called ．momentary death・.
   ：In other words, the momentary dissolution of formations, nor the ．death・ of conventional (metaphorical) usage in such expressions as ．dead tree・, ．dead metal・ and so on (is not meant here).； In the Visuddhi Magga it actually says ：the iron is dead；, not metal. It should be dead iron.
   There is alchemy in the East as well as in the West. These people tried to do something to metal to make it beneficial for people. There is a saying in Burmese ：If you can kill the iron, you can feed the whole country.； I don・t know what that means. There is another saying ：If you can kill the iron, you can turn lead into gold.； It is also said that you can cure diseases. They tried to burn these metals and make them into ashes. Then they would mix them with honey and so on and treat people. Many people believe such ashes can treat many kinds of diseases. So when we say ．The iron is dead; the copper is dead.；, we are using conventional usage. That kind of death is not meant here. What is meant here is just the end of one life.
   ：As intended here it is of two kinds, that is to say, timely death and untimely death. Herein, timely death comes about with the exhaustion of merit, or with the exhaustion of a life span, or with both. Untimely death comes about through kamma that interrupts [other, life-producing] kamma.；
   ．Death through the exhaustion of merit・ - that means death through the exhaustion of the force of kamma. Let us suppose that the life span is now one hundred years. However a person whose kamma cannot give him one hundred years may die before he reaches that age. He may die at the age of fifty, forty, or even younger. When he dies in that way, he is said to die through the exhaustion of merit or through the exhaustion of the force of kamma. That is why many people die now before reaching the end of the life span.
   Sometimes people have very strong kamma. Their kamma could make them live for one thousand years, many hundreds of years. If they live at a time when humans only live for one hundred years, then they will die at the end of that life span. They may have kamma which can make them live for more than one hundred years, but since they are reborn at a time when people live for only one hundred years, they have to die at the age of one hundred years. That is called ．exhaustion of a life span・.
   The death through the exhaustion of both is when a person has a kamma which will cause him to live for one hundred years, and he is reborn at a time when people live for one hundred years, and he dies at the age of one hundred years. That is death through both.
   The last one is untimely death. That is mostly tragic death. ：Untimely death is a term for the death of those whose continuity is interrupted by kamma capable of causing them to fall (c?vana) from their place at that very moment, as in the case of D|si-M?ra, Kal?bur?j?, etc., or for the death of those whose [life・s] continuity is interrupted by assaults with weapons, etc., due to previous kamma.；
   Sometimes people do a very heinous offense or crime like killing an Arahant. Such people sometimes die immediately. Here the example of D|si-M?ra is given. He tried to kill Venerable S?riputta. One day Venerable S?riputta shaved his head. So his head was very smooth and shining. D|si-M?ra wanted to hit him. He hit him on the head. Venerable S?riputta was in jh?na, in sam?patti. Nothing happened to Venerable S?riputta. Because of that kamma D|si-M?ra died immediately.
   Kal?bur?j? was a king who killed a sage who practiced patience. There was a sage named Khantivara. He was very famous and once he came to the city and sat in the garden or pleasure grove of the king. The king was asleep. So his queens and concubines went to the hermit in order to listen to the Dhamma. When the king woke up, he did not see his wives. So he looked around. When he reached the hermit, he asked ：What are you?； The sage replied ：I am a hermit.； The king asked ：What do you practice?； The sage replied ：I practice patience.； The king asked ：What is patience?； The hermit said that it was having forbearance with regard to whatever people may do to you. Then the king said ：Let us see your patience.； He called his executioners and had them cut off the hands of that sage. Then he asked him ：Are you still patient?； The sage replied ：Patience does not lie in the hands.； Then the king had the feet of the sage cut off and questioned him again. The sage said he was not angry with him and that he was not upset. He said that patience was here. The king kicked him and went away. When the king went away, a general heard about what happened. He rushed to the sage and asked him to be angry with the king. He said ：Please be angry with the king because if you get angry with the king you will suffer less.； The sage said ：People like me do not get angry. Let him live long.； Because of that offense the king was swallowed by the earth. He was consumed by the earth. Such death is called ．untimely death・. They have past kamma and they have life span, but their crime is so bad that they have to die. Sometimes they die in accidents. These are called ．untimely death・.
Student: About not getting angry, how would his kamma be less because somebody got angry?
Teacher: It is like with regard to wholesome acts sewing seeds in a field which is fertile and in a field which is not fertile. The effect or result of killing differs with the being who is killed. If the being that is killed is virtuous, there is more akusala. If the being that is killed is larger, then there is more akusala and so on. There are variations in degree of offense with regard to the virtue of the person being killed and also whether there is more effort needed to kill. Killing an ant and killing an elephant are not the same; they do not have the same degree of akusala or unwholesomeness. To kill an elephant you have to make much effort. The more effort there is, the more akusala there is.
Student: So what you are saying is the general misunderstood about this thing.
Teacher: No. The general did not misunderstand. The general wanted to make the offense less damaging for the king. If the hermit becomes angry, he will be less virtuous.
Student: This is a funny example. This is different from Mah?yana. The Mah?yana approach might be to convince and help the king. The sage should get angry. That is in a sense a play for virtue. If he wants the king・s punishment not to be so bad, he might get ．angry・, but it would not be out of actual anger. I don・t know.
Teacher: But when he gets angry, it will amount to breaking some vows or something. He might have made the vow ：I will be patient whatever people do to me.； So he kept it until his death.
Student: You mentioned that some people may have the kamma to live for one thousand years, but the life span is only a hundred years. With the nine hundred years remaining do you have some kind of credit?
Teacher: I wish we could. No. In order for kamma to ripen and give results we need different conditions - the time for the ripening of the kamma, the place for the ripening of the kamma, the condition of the ripening of the kamma and so on. When kamma gives results, it depends on these conditions.
   Mahasi Say?daw in one of hi talks said ：I am afraid that many Burmese people will be reborn in the United States. Why? Because they do a lot of meritorious deeds, especially d?na. These meritorious deeds will give them great results. Burma is a poor country. So when the kamma is able to make him a billionaire, Burma will not have enough.； It was something like that. In order for the kamma to give full results, it needs favorable conditions - favorable effort made by the person, then time, many things.
Student: Is it possible when a person dies young, that it is ever taken as a sign of good kamma? He might have a more favorable rebirth having died young.
Teacher: To die young is the result of not so good kamma.
Student: Let us say their life is miserable. They are born in the ghetto, have disease, never have contact with the Dharma, and they die young. Then they might have a better chance in another environment.
Teacher: People are reborn as human beings as the result of wholesome kamma. This wholesome kamma has different capabilities, different abilities, different power. Some wholesome kamma can only give ten years. Other wholesome kamma may give twenty years, thirty years and so on. Whenever a person is reborn as a human being, he is said to be reborn as the result of good kamma. But that good kamma varies. That person does not die as the result of bad kamma, but as the result of good kamma that is not strong enough to make him live longer.
Student: In other words children that die young do not have as much good kamma as someone who lives to be eighty five or ninety?
Teacher: That・s right. The recollection on death I think is not so difficult. The Visuddhi Magga tells us how to reflect on death in different ways. 
   In paragraph 7 ：When some exercise it merely in this way (That means death will take place, death will come, I will die one day.), their hindrances get suppressed, their mindfulness becomes established with death as its object, and the meditation subject reaches access.； Those are gifted people.
   ：But one who finds that it does not get so far should do his recollecting of death in eight ways, that is to say: (1) as having the appearance of a murderer, (2) as the ruin of success； - not the ．ruin of success・ but success and failure - ：(3) by comparison, (4) as to sharing the body with many (That means we have to share our body with worms, insects, germs and all these things.) (5) as to the frailty of life, (6) as signless, (7) as to limitedness of the extent, (8) as to the shortness of the moment.； We can reflect on death in different ways.
   Towards the end of the recollection of death there is a large footnote discussing pa??atti. We will discuss it next week.
   There are many examples given and we cannot go to every reference. In footnote 6 many references are given - Mah?sammata, Mandh?tu, Mah?sudassana, Da?hanemi, Nimi, Jotika, Ja?ila, Ugga and so on. Some of the persons mentioned are found mostly in J?taka tales and also in the Suttas. Then in paragraph 19 V?sudeva, Baladeva, and so on are mostly taken from Hindu books. There is some kind of relationship between Hindu stories and Buddhist stories. Some Hindu stories are told as Buddhist stories in the J?takas. V?sudeva, Baladeva, Bh?masena, Yuddhi??hila and C??ura are mentioned in the J?takas, but I think they originally came from Hindu sources.
   The main point here is that persons who are of great merit, who are of great strength, who possess supernormal powers and even the Buddha had to die. There is no point in saying we will not die. Comparing ourselves with these persons, we reflect on death, that death will come to us one day.
   This recollection has to be done with wisdom, has to be done with understanding. Paragraph 5 ：If he exercises his attention unwisely in recollecting the [possible] death of an agreeable person, sorrow arises, as in a mother on recollecting the death of her beloved child she bore; and gladness arises in recollecting the death of a disagreeable person, as in enemies on recollecting the death of their enemies; and no sense of urgency arises on recollecting the death of a neutral person, as happens in a corpse-burner on seeing a dead body; and anxiety arises on recollecting one・s own death, as happens in a timid person on seeing a murderer with a poised dagger.；
   ：In all that there is neither mindfulness nor sense of urgency nor knowledge. So he should look here and there at beings that have been killed or have died, and advert to the death of beings already dead but formerly seen enjoying good things, doing so with mindfulness, with a sense of urgency and with knowledge, after which he can exercise his attention in the way beginning '．Death will take place'.； So when you practice this kind of meditation, you have to be very careful.
   It is amazing that thinking of death makes you less afraid of death. Also the recollection on death can reduce to a very great degree your pride or attachment.
   You may have experienced being very sick or very ill. You may have thought that you were going to die. In that case you don・t have any attachment, or any anger or whatever. You do not have any pride in yourself. You are very humble. You are like an Arahant at that time because you don・t want anything. You are not attached to anything at that time. So recollection on death is a very good weapon in fighting against attachment, hatred, pride and others.
   And when death really comes, you will be able to face it with more calmness than those who do not practice this kind of meditation. That is why the Buddha said that monks must practice this meditation. Everyday monks must practice recollection of the Buddha, loving-kindness meditation, foulness of the body meditation and recollection of death.
   One thing I want to say in paragraph 35 it says ：As to the limitedness of the extent: the extent of human life is short now. One who lives long lives a hundred years, more or less.； What the Buddha meant here is ：One who lives long lives a hundred years, or a little more.； It is not ．more or less・. That means he may live to be 120 years, 150 years, 160 years, not ．more or less・. So ：One who lives long lives a hundred years, or a little more.； There are two sentences like that.
   We will discuss pa??atti next week and go into the section on mindfulness of the body - up to page 270, not many pages.

                         S?dhu!         S?dhu!          S?dhu!
   

                                        (Tape 16 / Ps: 36 -60) 


    Last week  we came to the end of the section on the recollection of death: There is a footnote in The Path of purification giving information about concept or pa??atti. It is in connection with the verses in paragraph 39.  The last verse reads:
		： No [world is ]   born if[ consciousness is ] not   
		  Produced; when that is present, then it lives;
		  When consciousness dissolves, the world is dead:
		  The highest sense this concept will allow,；

   Actually the last line means that here  concept is virtually reality in the ultimate sense or in the highest sense. The P??i words for this line is pa??atti paramatthiy?. That means here pa??atti is paramattha. That is because when we say someone lives or someone dies  we really are talking about consciousness arising and disappearing. When we talk about consciousness, we are talking about an ultimate reality. Here concept is virtually ultimate reality.

     		In connection with that the translator gives information about pa??atti or concept.  He took this information from the commentary on the Puggalapa??atti one of the books in Abhidhamma. There are 7 books in Abhidhamma. This Puggalapa??atti is one of them. It is the one book in Abhidhamma that does not look like Abhidhamma. It is in fact taken from Sutta Pi?aka because it describes different types of beings, different types of human beings. The book is called Puggalapa??atti (Concept of Persons).
   The word ．pa??atti in P??i has two meanings. The first meaning is that which makes known or that which designates. That which makes known or that which designates is called ．n?ma pa??atti・. We will call it ．name-concept・. That means the words which denote the things. The words denoting the things or the names we give to different things are called ．n?ma pa??atti・. This is because they make things known. When I say ：table；, you know the thing, a table. When I say ：man；, you know the being, man. The names or the words are called ．pa??atti・ here.
   The second meaning is that which is made known, that which is designated. That is called ．attha pa??atti・, thing concept. So there are two kinds of concepts - name-concept and thing-concept. The word or the name ．man・ is the name-concept. The person, the man himself, is thing-concept. The being, man, is designated by or made known by the word or the name ．man・. We can think of many examples of this. When we say ．car・, the word ．car・ is name-concept and the thing which we call a car is thing-concept. Mostly today we are going to learn about name-concepts. In that book of Abhidhamma first the six kinds of concepts or designations are given.
   The notes I have given you are the same as the small print in this book. It is difficult to read the small print in this book. In order to facilitate reading I made these notes. They are not new.
    There are concept of aggregates, concept of bases, concept of elements, concept of truths, concept of faculties and concept of persons. These are the six kinds of concepts dealt with in that book of Abhidhamma, Puggalapa??attii.
   The examples for concept of aggregates would be aggregate of matter, or aggregate of feeling, aggregate of perception and so on. Examples for concept of bases would be eye-base, ear-base and so on. Examples of concept of elements are eye-element, ear-element and so on. Concept of Truth is Noble Truth of Suffering, Noble Truth of Origin of Suffering and so on. Concept of faculties are exemplified by eye faculty, ear faculty and so on. For the concept of persons there are many kinds of persons mentioned in that book. One who is ．free from defilements at appropriate times・ is only one of them. There are different kinds of persons mentioned in that book of Abhidhamma. These are the concepts according to the Texts.
   Apart from the concepts mentioned in the Texts there are other kinds of concepts mentioned in the Commentaries. They are ．concept of the existent・, ．concept of the non-existent・, ．concept of the non-existent by the existent・, ．concept of the existent by the non-existent・, ．concept of the existent by the existent・ and ．concept of the non-existent  by the non-existent・. These six are important. These six are also mentioned in The Manual of Abhidhamma. In the eighth chapter of The Manual of Abhidhamma these six are given.
   Here ．existent・ means something which has three phases of existence - arising, continuing and disappearing or dissolution. These three phases or these three submoments are called the common characteristics of all conditioned phenomena. Anything that is conditioned must have these three characteristics - arising, continuing for some time, and then disappearing. Anything that has these three phases of existence is called ．existent・. Anything that does not have these three phases is called ．non-existent・.
   According to the teachings of Abhidhamma only those that are mentioned in Abhidhamma like consciousness, mental states, material properties and Nibb?na are existent. The others are non-existent. So pa??atti is actually non-existent. Only the ultimate truths are existent.
   So the concept of the existent is the name of something which is said to be existent. Kusala or akusala, these are the terms for wholesome or unwholesome conscioousness. These names are the concepts of the existent.
   The concept of the non-existent means names given to things or beings that are non-existent according to Abhidhamma. A man, a woman, a house, a table, or whatever is supposed to be non-existent according to the ultimate sense. This is because there is no woman apart from the aggregates, no man apart from the aggregates, no house apart from the different parts like roof, walls, doors and so on. Therefore they are called ．non-existent・. The name ．woman・, or the name ．man・, or the name ．house・ are the names of non-existent beings or the name of a non-existent thing. 
   Sometimes we combine these two, existent and non-existent. Then we get four more of these concepts.
   The third is ．the concept of the non-existent by the existent・, concept of the non-existent by or with what is existent. ．One with the three clear visions・ is an example. You must understand the P??i word ．tivijj?・. Here ．one・ is non-existent. The person is non-existent. ．The three clear visions・ means knowledge, in P??i abhi???. The three clear visions are existent because they are ???a, one of the 52 mental states. This is a concept or designation of the non-existent by the existent.
   The next one is the designation of the existent by the non-existent. ．Form of a female・ is the example. ．Form・ means r|pa here, not a shape or something. R|pa is existent because it has its own three phases of existence - arising, continuing and disappearing. ．Female・ or ．woman・ is non-existent. Therefore ．form of a female・, this name, this designation is a designation of the existent by the non-existent.
   The next one is the concept of the existent by the existent. Both must be found in the Abhidhamma. Eye-contact is the example. ．Eye・ here means the eye sensitivity. It is among the 28 material properties. It is existent. Contact (phassa) is one of the 52 mental states. So it is existent. Eye-contact is a concept of the existent by the existent.
   The last one is the concept of the non-existent by the non-existent. Both must be non-existent according to ultimate reality. A banker・s sone is the example. A son is non-existent and a banker is also non-existent. This is the designation of the non-existent by the non-existent. These are the six kinds of concepts mentioned in the Commentaries.
   You can give other examples following these. For the non-existent there are a car, a house, a lamp, a kettle. For the non-existent by the existent there are one with clear vision, one with attachment, one with anger. For the existent by the non-existent we have form of a female. The first must be existent and the last non-existent.
Student: A cup of tea.
Teacher: No.
Student: A monk・s kusala
Teacher: Right. A monk・s kusala, a monk・s akusala, a monk・s voice you could say. Voice is one of the 28 material properties. For the next one, eye-contact you can substitute some other thing like eye-consciousness. Eye is existent and consciousness is also existent. The last one, banker・s son is non-existent by non-existent. 
Student: (inaudible) Bumper-sticker.
Teacher: Right. This is the set of six concepts mentioned in the Commentaries. Other lists of concepts are also given. There are concepts according to teachers. They are not even found in the Commentaries, but they are mentioned by teachers. There are two sets with six in each set. 
   One is derivative concept. That means depending upon something a name is given. For example the name ．being・ is given depending upon the combination of five aggregates. The name ．chariot・ is given depending upon the combination of various parts. Such concepts are called derivative concepts.
   The second one is appositional concept. It has sub-divisions. They are given at the end of the list. We will go to them later. ．Second・ and ．third・ are the examples. When we say that this is second, then the other is third. When we say that this other is third, then the next one is fourth and so on. That is the appositional concept.
   Then we have collective concept. Examples are ．eight-footed・, ．pile of riches・. These are the names of collective things.
   The fourth one is additive concept. That means adding one more. The example ．two, three, four・ is given. There should be no ．one・ in the footnote because there is nothing added there. From two onward we have adding, so two, three, four. In the Commentary also it is given as ．two, three, four・.
   Then there is verisimilar concept. That means the names of those things that are taught in Abhidhamma. Such things as earth-element, water-element, consciousness, mental factors are all examples of the verisimilar concept.
   The sixth one is continuity concept. That is the name given depending upon the continuity of a being. Examples are octagenerarian and nonagenerarian (an eighty year old man, a ninety year old man) and so on.
   There is another set of six according to teachers. There are two sets of concepts according to teachers. 
   The first one of the second set is concept according to function. Examples of preacher and Dhamma teacher are given. They are names given depending upon the function done by that person. 
   The next one is concept according to shape or form. Such things as thin man, round man, stout man and so on are examples.
   The next one is concept according to gender. A man, a woman are concepts according to gender. 
   The fourth one is concept according to location. That is of sense-sphere. This citta belongs to k?m?vacara sense-sphere. This citta belongs to r|p?vacara sense-sphere. Or we have ．Kosalan・. Kosalan is a native of Kosala. Kosala is the name of a place. So we can put here ．American・.
   Then there is concept as Proper name. That is one・s own name. The examples are all names in P??i - Tissa, N?ma, Sumana. So you can put any name you like, your own name there.
   The last one is the concept of the unconditioned. That is the name of things that are not conditioned. Examples are cessation and Nibb?na. 
   The appositional concept is sub-divided into eight. Maybe we can add many more. The first one is apposition of reference. That is like with reference to the second the other is called the third. Then we have long and short. That means for example that one foot is long compared to six inches. One foot is short compared to two feet and so on. This is called apposition of reference. 
   The second one is apposition of what is in the hand. If you have an umbrella in the hand, you are called ． the man with umbrella-in-hand・.  If you have a kettle in your hand, then you are ．the person with the kettle-in-your-hand・ and so on.
   Then there is apposition of association. The example is ．earring-wearer・ or jacket-wearer. You can say anything.
   Then there is apposition proximity with the example of ．Indas?la Cave・. ．Indas?la is the name of a tree. So ．Indas?la Cave・ means a cave near that tree. A tree cannot be a cave and a cave cannot be a tree. Here ．Indas?la Cave・ means a cave close to the Indas?la tree. Here we might say ．Redwood Cave・.
   Next there is apposition of comparison. ．Comparison・ really means similarity here. The example is ．gold colored・.  ．Gold colored・ means with color similar to that of gold.
   Then there is apposition of majority. We have the example of lotus pond. There may be some other flowers in the pond. Since most of them are lotus, we say lotus pond. We say ：the United States of America；. There are Asians now in this country, but we still call the country ．America・. In the books it is said ．Brahmana Village・, the village of brahmanas. In the village there are mostly brahmanas, but there are other people too.
   Finally we have apposition of distinction. That means something special about that thing. Ruby bracelet is the example. In the book it says ：diamond ring；, but the P??i word means bracelet, not a ring. So ．ruby bracelet・ is correct.
   In the notes in footnote 11 there is some problem with the translation. For apposition of majority the example of Padumassara-Brahman Village is given. ．Padumassara・ is one word and ．Brahman・ is another word. They are not one word. They are two words. ．Padumassara・ means lotus pond. ．Brahman Village・ is Brahman Village. There are two examples, not one. He misunderstands this.
   These are the different kinds of concepts taught in the Texts, Commentaries and also taught by the teachers. According to the teachings of Abhidhamma concepts do not have the three phases of existence. We cannot say that a concept has time. It has no existence or no reality. It exists only in our minds. 
   It might be similar to chemists saying that there is no such thing as water apart from the two elements combined together. In the sense of chemistry there is no water but just oxygen and hydrogen. So water is a concept. Hydrogen and oxygen are ultimate realities according to chemistry. According to chemistry water has no existence of its own. It is just a combination of two elements. In the same way a man or a woman has no real existence. They exist only in the minds of people.
   In footnote 12 it says ：A concept is a dhamma without individual essence.； We cannot say that a concept has this individual essence, this characteristic, or that individual essence, that characteristic. They are just concepts. They just exist in our minds. They are not ultimate reality. These are the concepts.
   We have to understand two kinds of truths - conventional truth and the ultimate truth. On the conventional level we use words denoting concepts like man, woman, table, house. On the ultimate level we use words like consciousness, contact, feeling and so on. There are these two kinds of truth, conventional truth and ultimate truth. ．Conventional truth・ is called pa??atti in P??i. It has many divisions. Name-concept and thing-concept are the primary divisions. Everything we see around us, including ourselves, is concept. The things with which we and other things are composed, the things with which we are made, are the ultimate truths. The five aggregates are ultimate truth, but a man or a woman is not ultimate reality, but conventional truth. These are the different kinds of concepts taught in Abhidhamma.
Student: How many more concepts of the unconditioned could there be? There aren・t very many more are there?
Teacher: Cessation, Nibb?na, deathless - anything which denotes Nibb?na. We have to understand that unconditioned and the supramundane are different. There are types of consciousness belonging to the supramundane level such as Path consciousness and Fruition consciousness. Although they are supramundane, they are still conditioned. They need conditions to arise. They are not unconditioned although they take the unconditioned as object, the unconditioned which is Nibb?na as object. So if we want to give some more examples, we have to find some more names for Nibb?na, things like extinction of suffering, destruction of cankers, things like that.
   Now we go to the next section, mindfulness occupied with the body. It begins with a quotation from the Suttas where Buddha praised the practice of mindfulness occupied with the body or mindfulness of the body. ：Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and repeatedly practiced, it leads to a supreme sense of urgency, to supreme benefit, to supreme surcease of bondage, to supreme mindfulness and full-awareness, to acquisition of knowledge and vision, to a happy life here and now, to realization of the Fruit of clear vision and deliverance. What is that one thing? It is mindfulness occupied with the body.；
   Then there is a quote from another Sutta. ：Bhikkhus, they savor the deathless who savor mindfulness occupied with the body; they do not savor the deathless who do not savor mindfulness occupied with the body.；
   What this actually means is that when people practice mindfulness occupied with the body, they do not stop at just mindfulness occupied with the body. After practicing mindfulness occupied with the body, they practice vipassan?. That is why they are said to savor the deathless or Nibb?na.
   ：They have savored the deathless who have savored mindfulness occupied with the body; they have not savored.. They have neglected.. They have not neglected.. They have missed.. They have found the deathless who have found mindfulness occupied with the body. And it has been described in fourteen sections in the passage beginning ．And how developed, bhikkhu, how repeatedly practiced is mindfulness occupied with the body of great fruit, of great benefit? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu, gone to the forest・..； and so on.
   These are the utterances of the Buddha in praise of mindfulness of the body. We are not to understand that only mindfulness of the body is the best. There are different kinds of meditation.We have come through many kinds of meditation. Any meditation if we practice properly will lead to the attainment of the deathless or the attainment of Nibb?na.
   If we pick up only this statement, we may want to say that only mindfulness of the body is the thing to practice, not other kinds of meditation because here the Buddha said that those that savor mindfulness of the body savor the deathless. In fact every kind of meditation, even samatha meditation when made the basis for vipassan?, can help people get enlightenment. Any kind of meditation is good for practice. 
   Mindfulness occupied with the body is described in fourteen sections in the Mah? Satipa??h?na Sutta. There are four foundations of mindfulness. They are contemplation of the body, contemplation of feeling, contemplation of consciousness, and contemplation of dhamma objects.
   Contemplation of the body is described in fourteen sections in the Mah? Satipa??h?na Sutta. All of them could be called mindfulness occupied with the body. Some sections or some meditationss have their own names. For example there is breathing meditation. This section of the Sutta is called ．breathing meditation・ or in P??i ．?n?p?nasati・ meditation. We don・t call it ．k?yag?tasati・ which is the original word for mindfulness occupied with the body. Mindfulness of the body covers all these fourteen sections - breathing, postures of the body, small activities of the body, 32 parts of the body (We are going to study them.), four elements, and nine cemetery meditations. They are all described under the heading of mindfulness of the body.
   ：And it has been described in fourteen sections in the passage beginning ．And how developed, bhikkhu, how repeatedly practiced is mindfulness occupied with the body of great fruit, of great benefit?・； The reference given is the Majjhima Nik?ya (Middle Length Sayings). The Mah? Satipa??h?na Sutta can be found in two collections, in the Collection of Long Suttas and in the Collection of Middle Length Suttas. The Great Discourse on the Foundations of Mindfulness appeared twice in the Tipi?aka.
   There are ：that is to say, the sections on breathing, on postures, on the four kinds of full-awareness, on attention directed to repulsiveness (This is the 32 parts of the body.), on attention directed to elements (four great elements), and on the nine charnel-ground contemplations.；
   ：Herein, the three, that is to say, the sections on postures, on the four kinds of full-awareness, and on attention directed to elements, as they are stated [in that Sutta], deal with insight.； They deal with vipassan? meditation, the section on postures, the section on four kinds of full-awareness, and the section on attention to elements.
   ：Then the nine sections on that charnel-ground contemplations, as stated there, deal with that particular phase of insight knowledge called Contemplation of Danger.； Actually I would say ：Contemplation of Flaws or Faults；, not necessarily danger. When we practice the charnel-ground meditation, we find fault with our bodies. We might have thought of our bodies as beautiful, as pretty, as desirable. When we practice this kind of meditation, we find fault with our bodies. The body is just a group of filthy things that have come together. It is something like that. So it deals with insight knowledge. In the beginning it may be samatha meditation, but ultimately it becomes vipassan?. 
   ：And any development of concentration in the bloated,etc., that might be implied there has already been explained in the Description of Foulness(Ch.VI). So there are only the two that is, the sections on breathing and on directing attention to repulsiveness, that, as stated there, deal with concentration (．Concentration・ here means samatha meditation.).； According to this the sections on breathing meditation and repulsiveness meditation are samatha meditation. They are treated as samatha meditation in the Visuddhi Magga. ：Of these, two, the section on breathing is a separate meditation subject, namely Mindfulness of Breathing.； This will come later.
   ：What is intended here as Mindfulness Occupied with the Body is the 32 aspects.； According to this meditation there are 32 parts. We human beings are made up of 32 parts. When we practice this meditation, we try to see these 32 parts as repulsive and so on. That is to get rid of attachment to our bodies and to get rid of attachment to the bodies of other people as well. 
   The 32 parts of the body are given here. ：Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this body, up from the soles of the feet and down from the top of the hair and contained in the skin as full of many kinds of filth thus: In this body there are head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidney, heart, liver, midriff, spleen, lights, bowels, entrails, gorge, dung, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil of the joints, and urine, the brain being included in the bone-marrow in this version [with a total of only 31 aspects].； In the Texts only 31 parts are mentioned, not 32 as we are familiar with. The one which is missing in the Texts is mentioned in a book which is called Pa?isambhid?magga. That book is said to have been preached by Venerable S?riputta, not by the Buddha. It was taught by the Venerable S?riputta.
   In our countries they are included in our Canon. They are treated as the Texts themselves. But Western people, Western critics, wanted to keep those out of the P??i Canon -  The Questions of Milinda, The Pa?isambhid?magga and there is another book called Mah? Niddesa. They are called post-Canonical books or scriptures. But in our countries we just include them with the Texts because we believe they were uttered during the time of the Buddha and that Buddha accepted them as authentic. So they are as good as the words of the Buddha. We just  regard them as belonging to the category of Texts.
Student: There are also 32 marks of the Buddha?
Teacher: Yes.
Student: They are not at all comparable to these things?
Teacher: Oh, no. Those marks are the marks of an extraordinary man. By those marks the soothsayers came to the conclusion that the child was going to be a Buddha or a universal monarch. It is said that these marks were mentioned in the books long before the Buddha came into the world. So they appeared in the books of Brahmanism or even before that. They just took from the books and incorporated into the Texts.
   These parts are for foulness meditation. They are different. So all the filthy parts of the body are given here - head hairs, body hairs, and so on. 
   The brain is not mentioned by the Buddha among the parts of the body. However it is mentioned in the Pa?isambhid?magga. The Commentaries and teachers of old include it in the parts of the body. They put the brain after dung and before bile. They put the brain between dung and bile.
   In some Suttas these 32 parts or 31 parts are treated as elements. The first 20 through dung or brain are said to belong to earth element. They have more earth element than other elements. The remaining ones are said to belong to water element - bile, phlegm, pus and so on. If we practice as element meditation, then we look at them as these belonging to earth element and those belonging to water element. 
Student: What are ．lights・?
Teacher: It is difficult to say because these are something like anatomical terms. We will come to it later. I don・t know. We will find out later. Other authors will have a different translation of this. (Later we determmined they were the lungs.) It is an internal part of the body. We take it as 32 parts of the body although only 31 are mentioned in the Suttas. So let us accept 32 parts of the body as a standard number.
   Now let us look at the word commentary. ：This body: this filthy body constructed out of the four primary elements. Up from the soles of the feet: from the soles of the feet upwards. Down from the top of the hair: from the highest part of the hair downwards. Contained in the skin: terminated all round by the skin. Reviews.. as full of many kinds of filth: he sees that this body is packed with the filth of various kinds beginning with head hairs. How? In this body there are head hairs； and so on. This kind of meditation is taught at every monastery. The novices are taught to recite these 32 parts again and again.
   ：Herein, there are means, there are found. In this: in this, which is expressed thus ．Up from the soles of the feet and down from the top of the hair and contained in the skin, as full of many kinds of filth: Body: the carcass; for it is the carcass that is called ．body (k?ya)・ because it is a conglomeration of filth, because such vile (kucchita)  things as the head hairs, etc., and the hundred diseases beginning with eye disease, have it as their origin (?ya).； ．Carcass, is it a dead body?
Student: Usually, but not necessarily.
Teacher: Here it does not mean a dead body. It is just a body here, not necessarily a dead body.
Students: It is something that a vulture or a bird of prey would eat. It could be just a skeleton.
Teacher: Here it is just the body. Maybe English has no other word for the body. In P??i the word is ．k?ya・ and k?ya is defined by another word ．sar?ra・. Sar?ra is a synonym for k?ya in P??i. There may not be another word for body in English. Although the word ．carcass・ is used, we should understand that it is not a dead body. We try to see in our living body head hairs, body hairs and so on. We try to see the repulsiveness of these things because such vile things as the head hairs, the hundred diseases beginning with eye disease have it as their origin.
   The word ．k?ya・ is explained as being a compound word, ．ku・ plus ．?ya・. ．Ku・ plus ．?ya・ becomes k?ya according to P??i grammar. ．Ku・ here means vile or despicable. ．?ya・ means place or here origin, the place of head hairs, the hundred diseases and so on. That is why the body is called ．k?ya・ in P??i. This is the explanation of the word.
   ：No one who searches throughout the whole of this fathom-long carcass, starting upwards from the soles of the feet, starting downwards from the top of the head, and starting from the skin all around, ever finds even the minutest atom at all beautiful in it, such as a pearl, or a gem, or beryl, or aloes, or saffron, but the various malodorous, offensive, drab-looking sort of filth consisting of head hairs, body hairs and the rest.；
   When you want to practice this kind of meditation, the first thing you have to do is recite. You must learn the sevenfold skill in learning the meditation subject. They are 1. Verbal recitation 2. Mental recitation 3. As to color 4. As to shape 5. As to direction 6. As to location 7. As to delimitation. You must understand all these with  respect to the 32 parts..
   First you learn these words - head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin, sinews and so on by heart. 
Student: I found the definition of carcass here. The first definition is the dead body of an animal. The second definition is the living body of a human being.
Teacher: That is what we mean here, the second meaning..
   So the first thing we have to do is recite. ：Even if one is master of the Tipi?aka, the verbal recitation should still be done at the time of first giving it attention.； Even though you are well familiar with the three Pi?akas, you must do the recitation.
   ：For the meditation subject only becomes evident to some through recitation, as it did to the two elders who learned the meditation subject from the Elder Mah?deva of the Hill Country (Malaya). On being asked for the 32 aspects, saying, ．Do only this recitation for four months・.； You recite 32 parts for four months.
   ：Although they were familiar respectively with two and three Pi?akas； - that means they know two Pi?akas and three Pi?akas. So they are learned persons. But this monk, this elder, is telling them to recite the 32 parts. Actually they must have already learned these 32 parts, but they accept his advice. ：Although they were familiar respectively with two and three Pi?akas, it was only at the end of four months recitation of the meditation subject that they became Stream Enterers.； Actually it means they became Stream Enterers just reciting the 32 parts.
   They became Stream Enterers not just by recitation. First they did the recitation. Then they review each part as foul or loathsome. Then they develop vipassan? on it. Without vipassan? there can be no Stream Entry. Although it would appear here that they just recite and become Sot?pannas, that is not the case. For four months they recite this back and forth, back and forth. Then they got the counterpart sign and so on. Then they became Sot?pannas after practicing vipassan? on it. Without vipassan? there can be no Stream Entry.
   ：With right apprehension [of the text]； - that is not the translation of the P??i word. The P??i word is padakkhi?agg?hit?. That means ．since they take advice with respect・. ．Padakkhi?agg?hit? means ．taking with respect・. These two were learned monks. But when the teacher told them ：You recite the 32 parts for four months.；, they did not say that they had already learned it or that they did not need to recite it.They had too much respect for the teacher to refuse. So following with respect the advice of the teacher, they recited for four months and during that time they became Stream Enterers.； ．With right apprehension [of the text]・ is not the right translation of the P??i word.
   ：Now when he does the recitation, he should divide it up into the ．skin pentad・, etc., and do it forward and backwards.； You may look at the notes. It took me one and a half hours to type these.
   The first part is the 32 parts. Head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth and skin are the skin pentad, that is they are the five ending with skin. The next one is flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow and kidney. That is the five ending with kidney. Then there are the five ending with lungs. After that there are the five ending with the brain. And then there are six ending with fat. The last is six ending with urine. The 32 parts are divided into groups of five, five, five, five, six and six. Recitation should be done this way.
   There is another book, another Commentary written by the same author. It is the Commentary on the second book of Abhidhamma. In the second book of Abhidhamma there is mention of the four foundations of mindfulness. These are mentioned there too.
   The recitation I give on these notes are the combination of the statements found in two Commentaries, in The Path of Purification and the Sammohavinosan?. In The Path of Purification there is no mention of how many days you are to recite each group, not how to recite forward and backwards, and so on. There in the other book the method is given. So I combined these two into one.
   It will take how many days? 165 days to recite. So you have to spend five and a half months just reciting verbally. This meditation will take a long time.
   For the first one we say ：Head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin.； Forward this way you recite for five days. ：Head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin； you say thousands and thousands of times.
   Then the next five days you go backwards. You say ：Skin, teeth, nails, body hairs, head hairs; skin, teeth, nails, body hairs, head hairs.；
Student: Just verbal recitation?
Teacher: Yes, just verbal recitation. But when you recite the verbal recitation, you also must know the meaning of the words. That meaning must soak into your mind. Next will come mental recitation. The verbal recitation alone will take 165 days.
   Then you must go forward and backwards. That is you say ：Head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin; skin, teeth, nails, body hairs, head hairs.； You go back and forth , back and forth for five days. The skin pentad will take 15 days.
   Then the next pentad is the kidney pentad. Then you say ：Flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidney； forward for five days. However when you say backwards, you say not only these five, but the previous five as well. Backwards for the kidney pentad is ：Kidney, bone marrow, bones, sinews, flesh, skin, teeth, nails, body hairs, head hairs.； If you look at the notes, I put numbers because it is very boring to type these words again and again, even the numbers. The kidney pentad for the last five days is ：6,7,8,9,10, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.；
   Then after these two pentads you combine the two pentads and recite them for 15 days. For the first five days you recite 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,,9,10. That is forward. For the second five days you recite backwards 10,9,8,7,6,,4,3,2,1. For the last five days you recite forward and backward 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10; 10,9,8,7,6,5,4,3,2,1. That is 15 days.
   Then the next pentad you recite 11,12,13,14,15 for the first five days. Then backward you go back to number one. So for five days you recite 15.14,13,12,11,10, 9,8,7,6,5,4,3,2,1. For the third five days you recite forward and backward.
   After each pentad you combine with the previous pentads. So you combine two pentads, three pentads, four pentads, five groups together, and six groups together. If you do it this way, it will take 165 days.
Student: You do this the whole day?
Teacher: That is a good question. Most of the day. If you are a monk, you have to go out for alms. Still you can do mental recitation. Monks are taught or instructed to go with meditation when they go for alms in the village or in the city. If a monk goes without meditation, he is not supposed to be a practicing monk. You go to the village or the city with some kind of meditation. Sometimes you may be practicing mindfulness and sometimes this kind of meditation. So you practice almost the whole day because this is intense practice. It is not just saying for a few minutes and then giving up.
   This is how to do verbal recitation. ：The recitation should be done verbally in this way a hundred times, a thousand times, even a hundred thousand times. For it is through verbal recitation that the meditation subject becomes familiar (If you spend 165 days, it cannot but become familiar.), and the mind being thus prevented from runnign here and there , the parts become evident and seem like [the fingers of] a pair of clasped hands, like a row of fence posts.；
   ：The mental recitation should be done just as it is done verbally. For the verbal recitation is a condition for the mental recitation, and the mental recitation is a condition for the penetration of the characteristic [of foulness].； When you recite it again and again, the sign of foulness will beee evident to your mind.
   Thenou have to review them as to color. ：The color of the head hairs, etc., should be defined.； They are black or in this country blond, brunette, and red also.
Student: And lately green.
Teacher: Yes, now you can get any color.
   Then ：As to shape: their shape should be defined too.； They will be explained later in detail.
   ：As to direction: in this body, upwards from the navel is the upward direction (upper part of the body), and downwards from it is the downward direction (lower part of the body).； The navel is supposed to be the middle of the body. ：So the direction should be defined thus: This part is in this direction.；
   ：As to location (That is their place.): the location of this or that part should be defined thus: This part is establishedin this location.；
   ：As to delimitation: there are two kinds of delimitation, that is, delimitation of the similar and delimitation of the dissimilar. Herein, delimitation of the similar should be understood in this way: This part is delimited above and below and around by this.； This is called ．delimitation of the similar・. It is like saying this cup is delimited by the kettle on this side and it is delimited on the other side by the microphone. It is something like that. That is called ．delimitation of the similar・. Delimitation of the dissimilar is as an example : This is head hair and not body hair. And when you come to body hair: This is body hair, not head hair. Delimiting in that way is called ．delimitation of the dissimilar・.
   ．Dissimilar・ here just means ．not similar・. It does not mean opposite. ：Delimitation of the dissimilar should be understood as non-intermixed-ness in this way: Head hairs are not body hairs, and body hairs are not head hairs.；
   ：When the teacher tells the skill in learning in seven ways thus, he should do so knowing that in certain Suttas this meditation subject is expounded from the point of view of repusiveness and in certain Suttas  from the point of view of elements. For in the Mah? Satipa??h?na Sutta it is expounded only as repulsiveness.； These 32 parts of the body meditation are given there to develop the sense of repulsiveness.
   ：In the Mah? Hatthipadopama Sutta (M.Sutta 28), in the Mah? R?hulov?da Sutta (M.Sutt?), and the Dh?tuvibha~ga (M.Sutta, also Vbh.82) it is expounded as elements.； They are divided into two elements actually. The first twenty belong to the earth element and the remaining ones belong to the water element. With regard to elements they are mentioned there.
   ：in the K?yagat?sati Sutta (M.Sutta 119), however, four jh?nas are expounded with reference to one to whom it has appeared as a color [kasi?a].； Now when you practice the 32 parts of the body meditation, you cannot get second jh?na and so on. You can get only first jh?na. But in the Sutta four jh?nas are mentioned. Four jh?nas are mentioned because for that monk these parts appear as color, not as parts of the body. When they appear to him as color, he picks up the color kasi?a meditation. Color kasi?a meditation can lead to all four or five jh?nas. That is why it is said here ：four jh?nas are expounded with reference to one to whom it has appeared as a color [kasi?a].；
   In some of the meditations it says you are not to pay attention to color, right? If you pay attention to color, it becomes color kasi?a meditation.
   ：Herein, it is an insight meditation subject that is expounded as elements and a serenity meditation subject that is expounded as repulsiveness.； It is an insight meditation subject that is expounded as elements; if we divide them into two kinds of elements and we try to contemplate on those elements, it is insight meditation. It is a serenity meditation that is expounded as repulsiveness. When you try to see the repulsiveness of these things, it is samatha meditation.
   ：Consequently it is only the serenity meditation subject [that is relevent] here.； In this part of the book only samatha meditation is mentioned. We should understand the meditation here as serenity or samatha meditation.
   Next we have the tenfold skill in giving attention. I think we will do it next week. We will go up to mindfulness of breathing.
Student: In the Chinese tradition there are these gems that are found with the bodies that have been cremated. Is there anything like that in Therav?da? They are often considered like relics or jewels. I don・t know much about it.
Teacher: In Burma the ashes are collected and put into a stupa or cetiya.
Student: Sometimes in the ashes there is a hard gem-like substance.
Teacher: In Therav?da only the Arahants when they are cremated may leave relics. They are like small rocks or seeds. It is said that the relics of Arahants are bigger in size than the relics of the Buddha.The relics of the Buddha are in three sizes - like mustard seeds, like broken rice, and the size of peas. These are the sizes of the relics of the Buddha. The relics of the Arahants are said to be larger in size than the relics of the Buddha.

                              S?dhu!     S?dhu!     S?dhu!
                                      (Tape 17 / Ps: 61 - 144)

   Today we begin with the tenfold skill in giving attention. The first set of instructions is recitation. First we are to do verbal recitation and then mental recitation. Then we are to view them as to color, as to shape, as to direction, as to location, as to delimitation. These are called ．the sevenfold skill in learning・. First we have to learn the meditation subject. 
   Now comes the tenfold skill in giving attention. The tenfold skill in giving attention is: 1. Following the order, 2. Not too quickly, 3. Not too slowly, 4. Warding off distraction, 5. Surmounting the concept, 6. Successive learning, 7. Absorption, 8-10. The three Discourses or three Suttantas.
   First following the order - ：From the time of beginning the recitation attention should be given following the serial order without skipping.； You must go from 1 to 32 and then back from 32 to 1. You are not to skip any one of them when you recite.
   The second is that when you recite you are not to do too quickly. When you do it too quickly, you will not remember them. ：For just as when a man sets out on a three-league journey, even if he has already done the journey out and back a hundred times rapidly without taking note of [turnings] to be taken and avoided, though he may finish his journey, he still has to ask how to get there.； We may go to a place many times, but we may not know how to go there especially when we are not driving. So you are not to go too quickly so that you may remember all of them.
   The third is to recite not too slowly. If you do it too slowly, you will not come to the end of the recitation, just like a man ：who loiters along the way among trees, rocks, pools, etc., does not finish the journey in a day. So too if the meditator gives his attention to the meditation subject too slowly, he does not get to the end and it does not get to the end and it does not become a condition for distinction.； ．Condition for distinction・ means condition for progress. ．Distinction・ here means progress in meditation including the realization of truth.
   The P??i word is ．visesa・. This word is used many times with regard to meditation. It means something new or something special. That means when we practice meditation, we discover one thing after another. These discoveries are called ．visesa・ or special. Before we practiced meditation, we did not know about breathing or the parts of the body. After we practice meditation, we get sam?dhi or concentration. And so we begin to see things differently from when we did not meditate. These things are called ．distinctions・ or ．special attainments・. This word will appear again and again in this book. Here it is translated as distinction.
   Then we have warding off distraction. ：He must ward off [temptation] to drop the meditation subject and to let his mind get distracted among the variety of external objects.； So he must pay attention to the parts of the body and not let his mind be distracted to other objects. When the mind is often distracted, the meditator will not get to the stage of realization. Here it is compared to a man going on a one-foot-wide cliff path. He must be very careful and he must not be distracted because if he is distracted, he will fall down from the cliff and he may die. ：So he should give his attention to warding off distraction.；
   ：As to surmounting the concept: this [name] concept beginning with ．head hairs, body hairs・ must be surmounted and consciousness established on [the aspect] ．repulsive・.； In the beginning we cannot avoid concepts because we live in the conventional world. So we have to use conventional terms like head hair, body hair and so on. In the beginning we will be seeing the hair, nails, teeth, skin which are called ．concepts・. But we have to surmount, we have to go beyond the convention, beyond the concepts. If we just see the head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin and so on, if we just see the picture or the appearance of these parts, we will not get the notion that the are repulsive. The purpose of this meditation is to arouse repulsiveness of these parts. So we have to go beyond the concept of head hairs, body hairs and so on. When a person begins to meditate and after some time gets enough concentration, he will be able to surmount the concept and establish his mind on the repulsiveness of these parts. We have to arrive at the repulsiveness of these parts, not just stopping at the parts. It is not merely learning these parts, but trying to see repulsiveness in these parts. It is not like medical students.
   Then the next one is successive leaving. ：In giving his attention he should eventually leave out any [parts] that do not appear to him.； That means that do not appear to his mind clearly, that which he does not see clearly in his mind. Although the meditator tries to see all of them clearly, some parts may not be clear to him or he may not see clearly some parts. In giving his attention he should eventually leave out any parts that do not appear to him clearly.
   ：For when a beginner gives his attention to head hairs, his attention then carries on until it arrives at the last part.； Because he is familiar with these 32 parts (he recites and pays attention.), then his mind goes to the end and then goes back and forth. But some parts may not appear to his mind clearly. He should drop those which do not appear clearly in his mind. He must take only those that are clear to him. This is called ．successive leaving・. So he leaves one after the other until he arrives at the last one.
   ：As he persists in giving attention thus, some parts appear to him and others do not. Then he should work on those that have appeared till one out of any two appears the clearer.； He drops them, one by one, until there are only two left which are the most clear for him. Then he tries to find out which is clearer among these two.  He should arouse absorption by again and again giving attention to the one that has appeared thus.； Eventually he ends with one part which is the most clear for him.
   Then a simile is given here with 32 palms, a monkey and so on. Also another simile is given in paragraph 70. A monk goes on almsround where there are 32 families or 32 houses. ．Alms-food-eater・ simply means a monk goes on almsround. Most monks in the olden days and even now go for alms every morning. Such a monk here is called ．alms-food-eater・. Actually whether a monk eats food brought by his devotees at the monastery or if he goes to the village and collects alms, he eats alms-food. Every monk is an alms-food-eater. But here ．alms-food-eater・ really means a monk who goes out for alms.
   I do not want to use the word ．beg・ because monks do not beg. The P??i word ．bhikkhu・ means one who begs. Here ．begging・ means going round the village silently. Whatever is given to the monk, he just accepts. He does not say ：Please give me food.； or something like that. Monks are not allowed to do that. So ．alms-food-eater・ means a monk who goes for alms in the village every day.
   So he might go to a village with 32 families. He might pick up two lots of alms at the first house. So he will drop one house. If he gets three lots at one house, then he will drop two houses and so on. On the third day he got his bowl full at the first house. Therefore he will not go any further. He will go to the sitting hall and eat. That is the simile. In the same way the meditator must go through the 32 parts and drop one by one the parts that are not clear to him.
   In paragraph 71 we have the application of this simile. ：The 32 aspects are like the village with 32 families. The meditator is like the alms-food-eater. The meditator・s preliminary work is like the alms-food-eater・s going to live near the village.； Actually it should be ：living near the village； or ：living depending on the village.；
   How do you say that? I live in a monastery, but I depend on this village for my food. How do you say that?
Student: Relying?
Teacher: Relying, yes. ：Relying on the village for support.；
   Then number 7 as to absorption. ．Absorption・ means jh?na. Absorption part by part, there are 32 parts. Taking one part and practicing meditation on it, you can get jh?na. ：Then intention here is this: it should be understood that absorption is brought about in each one of the parts.； So you can get 32 kinds of jh?na if you take one part at a time. Let us say you take head hairs as the part. You practice on it and get jh?na. Then you can take body hairs as the object of meditation. Then you practice meditation on it and you may get jh?na. At the end of it we have the story of a monk who gained jh?na dwelling on all of the 32 parts.
   And the three Suttantas - a yogi must study these three Suttas, these three Discourses. They are from the Sutta Pi?aka, namely those on higher consciousness (That is one Sutta.), on coolness (That is another Sutta.), and on skill in the Enlightenment Factors (That is still another Sutta.) which have as their purpose linking energy with concentration.
   The first Sutta says: ：Bhikkhus, there are three signs that should be given attention from time to time by a bhikkhu intent on higher consciousness.； ．Higher consciousness・ here means both samatha and vipassan?. A monk who is intent who is intent on higher consciousness - that means a monk who is practicing samatha meditation or vipassan? meditation should give attention from time to time to the three signs.
   The first is the sign of concentration. ．The sign of concentration・ really means just concentration or the object of concentration. In the Sub-Commentary it says that ．the sign of concentration・ simply means concentration, paying attention to concentration, or the object of concentration.
   The same is true for the sign of exertion. It is energy or the sign of effort and should be given attention from time to time.
   The sign of equanimity is also the same. It is equanimity itself or the object of equanimity that should be given attention from time to time.
   ：If a bhikkhu intent on higher consciousness gives attention only to the sign of concentration, then his consciousness may conduce to idleness.； Too much concentration causes idleness, or lethargy, or sometimes sleepiness.
Student: Is that for both samatha and vipassan?? 
Teacher: Yes, it is for both samatha and vipassan?. Too much concentration can cause sleepiness. ．Too much concentration・ means concentration in excess of exertion or effort. When you get too much concentration, you simply lose exertion or effort. Your exertion becomes less. In that case too much concentration leads to idleness, leads to sleepiness or something similar. You feel lethargic. Too much concentration is actually as bad as too little concentration because as we have learned in the previous chapters, they must be balanced. The five faculties must be balanced when we practice meditation. And especially concentration must be balanced with effort.
   Too much effort will cause what? Too much effort will cause agitation. If effort or exertion is in excess of concentration, agitation will come in. When there is too much energy, too much viriya, there is agitation.
Student: So an example of this would be Venerable ?nanda near his enlightenment.
Teacher: Oh, yes. Venerable ?nanda was practicing meditation to become an Arahant. He was too eager. So he put forth too much effort. He walked up and down practicing meditation in order to become an Arahant. He could not achieve anything by that practice. Later when he stopped and reviewed his practice, he saw that he had too much effort. So he slowed down. Then he was able to attain Arahantship. Too much effort also is not good.
   ：If a bhikkhu intent on higher consciousness gives attention only to the sign of equanimity, then his consciousness may not become rightly concentrated for the destruction of cankers.； It leads to delusion, to not knowing, to ignorance. This is so because equanimity is close to ignoring. When you ignore something, you become ignorant. But equanimity is not ignoring actually. Equanimity takes the object, the thing, and is not attached to it nor is it repulsed by it. That is what is called ．equanimity・.
   There is another thing which is wrongly called equanimity. Actually it is not. Sometimes when you ignore something, you may say that you have equanimity about that thing. That is not equanimity. That is just ignoring. Too much equanimity can lead to ignoring. Then there can be no more destruction of cankers or mental defilements. So a monk should pay attention from time to time to the sign of concentration, to the sign of exertion, and to the sign of equanimity.
   Then there is the simile of a goldsmith. Let us look at the second Sutta in paragraph 77. "Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses six things, he is able to realize the supreme coolness (coolness of mind). What six? Here, bhikkhus, when consciousness should be restrained, he restrains it.； There are times when you have to restrain your mind. You are too elated or too happy with your practice. If you are too elated or too happy, you will lose concentration. At that time you must suppress or restrain your mind.
   ：When consciousness should be restrained, he restrains it; when consciousness should be exerted, he exerts it; when consciousness should be encouraged, he encourages it; when consciousness should be looked upon with equanimity, he looks on at it with equanimity. He is resolute on the superior [state to be attained], he delights in Nibb?na. Possessing these six things a bhikkhu is able to realize the supreme coolness.； So a person must know when to encourage his mind, when to suppress his mind, when to exert his mind and all these things.
   Then the third Sutta is called The Skill in the Enlightenment Factors. It is already dealt with in the explanation of skill in absorption, in chapter 4, paragraphs 51 & 57. ：Bhikkhus, when the mind is slack, that is not the time for developing the tranquillity enlightenment factor.；
   ：So the meditator should make sure that he has apprehended this sevenfold skill in learning well and has properly defined this tenfold skill in giving attention, thus learning the meditation subject properly with both kinds of skill.； Whenever something is described in this book, it is described in detail, in a very serious manner. Before you practice this meditation, first you have to learn the 32 parts by heart. Then you recite. Then you have to learn these skills, skills in learning and skills in practice.
   There is a footnote here - ：PM. Explains.； Pm. means the Sub-Commentary of the Visuddhi Magga, the Paramattha-ma?j|s?. ：Paramattha-ma?j|s? explains ．sati sati ?yatane・ (rendered here by ．whenever there is occasion・) with ．tasmi? tasmi? pubbahetu-?di-k?ra?e sati (when there is this or that reason consisting in a previous cause etc.).； Actually it should be ：When there is this or that cause accumulated in previous lives.； It is something like a p?rami or p?ramit?.
Student: P?ramit??
Teacher: We call it p?ramit?, the accumulated experience through previous lives.
Student: Perfections? 
Teacher: Right. Now we come to the real practice.
   ：If it is convenient for him to live in the same monastery as the teacher, then he need not get it explained in detail thus, but as he applies himself to the meditation subject after he has made quite sure about it he can have each successive stage explained as he reaches each distinction.； As he reaches each stage, he may go to his teacher and ask about the other aspect.
   ：One who wants to live elsewhere, however, must get it explained to him in detail in the way already given, and he must turn it over and over, getting all the difficulties solved. He should leave an abode of an unsuitable kind as described in the Description of the Earth Kasi?a, and go to live in a suitable one. Then he should sever the minor impediments and set about the preliminary work for giving attention to repulsiveness.； So he should prepare properly for the practice of meditation. He should avoid the unsuitable monasteries and live in a monastery that is suitable for meditation. He should sever minor impediments. If his hair is long, he should cut his hair. If his nails are long, he should cut his nails. If his robes are soiled or dirty, he should wash them, clean them. There should not be even the lesser impediments to obstruct his practice of meditation.
   ：When he sets about it, he should first apprehend the [learning] sign in head hairs. How? (Then comes the description of the practice.) The color should be defined first by plucking out one or two head hairs and placing them on the palm of the hand. He can also look at them in the hair-cutting place (In the monastery we cut the hair of each other. The cut hair may still be at that place. So he may go there and pick up a hair or two and look at it.) or in a bowl of water or rice gruel. (Sometimes there may be hair in the water or rice gruel. He may look at it.) If the ones he sees are black when he sees them, they should be brought to mind as ．black・; if white, as ．white・; if mixed, they should be brought to mind in accordance with those most prevalent.； If there are more black, we say black. If there are more white, we say white.
   ：And as in the case of head hairs, so too the sign should be apprehended visually with the whole of the ．skin pentad・.； That is the first five parts of the body.
   ：Having apprehended the sign thus and [a] defined all the other parts of the body by color, shape, direction, location, and delimitation, he should  then [b] define repulsiveness in five ways, that is, by color, shape, odor, habitat, and location.；
   Now we come to the individual parts. The first is head hairs. In the description of these 32 parts there are words which are very difficult. Here the Commentator describes each part comparing with what were familiar things for them in those days. Also there are names of trees and flowers which we don・t know.
   Let us look at head hairs. ：Firstly head hairs are black in their normal color.； So the normal color is black; maybe because the author was an Indian and most Eastern people have black hair, he said that the normal color of head hairs is black. It may be different in the West. It is said that the hairs are ：the color of fresh ari??haka seeds.； Maybe we don・t know the name of the tree called ．ari??haka・. We make beads from the seeds of this tree.  They are black.
   ：As to shape, they are the shape of long round measuring rods. As to direction, they lie in the upper direction； ．Direction・ means the part of the body. The navel is the middle of the body. So ．upper direction・ means above the navel and ．lower direction・ means below the navel.
   ：As to location, their location is the wet inner skin that envelops the skull; it is bounded on both sides by the roots of the ears, in front by the forehead, and behind by the nape of the neck. As to delimitation, they are bounded below by the surface of their own roots, which are fixed by entering to the amount of the tip of a rice grain (just a bit) into the inner skin that envelops the head. They are bounded above by space, and all round by each other. There are no two hairs together. This is the delimitation by the similar. 
   Head hairs are not body hairs, and body hairs are not head hairs; being likewise not intermixed with the remaining 31 parts the head hairs are a separate part. This is their delimitation by the dissimilar.； There are two kinds of delimitation, by similar and by dissimilar. By dissimilar here means that head hairs are not body hairs and body hairs are not head hairs. They are separate. They are different.
   Then there is their definition as to repulsiveness in five ways. ：Head hairs are repulsive in color as well as in shape, odor, habitat and location.； What is ．habitat・? What is the difference between habitat and location?
Student: ．Habitat・ has to do with the inter-relationship of other factors within the same area. ．Location・ does not have that quality of inter-relatedness with other factors within the same area. 
Teacher: In the Sub-Commentary ．habitat・ or the P??i word ．?saya・ is explained as an origin or cause. If you grow some plants, the plants grow on the earth. They get nutrition from the earth. That is called ．?saya・. We have to differentiate ?saya from location.
   Let us read paragraph 85. ：For on seeing the color of a head hair in a bowl of inviting rice gruel or cooked rice people are disgusted and say ．This has got hairs in it. Take it away.・ So they are repulsive in color. Also when people are eating at night, they are likewise disgusted by the mere sensation of a hair-shaped akka-bark or makaci-barkfiber. (They are the names of trees.) So they are repulsive in shape. And the odor of head hairs, unless dressed with a smearing of oil, scented with flowers, etc., is most offensive. And it is still worse when they are put in the fire. Even if head hairs are not directly repulsive in color and shape, still their odor is directly repulsive. Just as a baby・s excitement, as to color is the color of tumeric and, as to its shape, is the shape of a piece of tumeric root, and just as the bloated carcass of a black dog thrown on a rubbish heap, as to its color, is the color of ripe palmyra fruit, and, as to its shape, is the shape of a [mandolin-shaped] drum left face down, and its fangs are like jasmine buds, and so even if both these are not directly repulsive in color and shape, still the odor is directly repulsive.； 
   Now instead of ．but・ we can say ．and・ or we can just delete ．but・. ：Just as pot herbs that grow on village sewage in a filthy place (This is a description with regard to habitat.) are disgusting to civilized people and unusable, so also head hairs are disgusting since they grow on the sewage of pus, blood, urine, dung, bile, phlegm, and the like.； They grow out of them. ：This is the repulsive aspect of the habitat.；
   ：And these head hairs grow on the heap of the [other] 31 parts as fungus do on a dung hill. And owing to the filthy place they grow in they are quite unappetizing as vegetables growing on a charnel ground, on a midden etc., as lotuses or water lilies growing in drains and so on. This is the repulsive aspect of their location.； Their location is repulsive and also their habitat or origin is repulsive.
   ：And as in the case of head hairs, so also the repulsiveness of all the parts should be defined in the same five ways by color, shape, odor, habitat, and location.；
   Here I want to leave out the word ．however・. We may say ．moreover・ or ．and・. ：All, moreover, must be defined individually by color, shape, direction, location and delimitation, as follows.； 
   Next is body hairs. They are not difficult to understand. Nails are also easy to understand.
   And then teeth - ：There are 32 teeth bones in one whose teeth are complete.； Is that right? Are there 32 teeth?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: ：They too are white in color. As to shape, they are of various shapes.； Then it goes on to describe them. These descriptions are like a textbook on anatomy.
    The next one is skin. Here ．skin・ means the inner skin, not the outer skin. ：The inner skin envelops the whole body. Outside is what is called the outer cuticle, which is black, brown or yellow in color, and when that from the whole of the body is compressed together, it amounts to only as much as a jujube-fruit kernel. (That is a small fruit.)； What is outermost is not called ．skin・. It is called ．cuticle・. Under that there is skin.
   Sometimes we have a sore. Then that cuticle may be removed and then there is skin.
Student: It is like a pig. When a pig is killed, it is put into hot water. The outer cuticle is removed and the skin is white.
Teacher: Oh, I see.
Student: They also say that another thing that is repulsive is that all the skin that we see is dead. That is said in another Commentary.
Teacher: ：But as to color, the skin itself is white; and its whiteness becomes evident when the outer cuticle is destroyed by contact with the flame of a fire or the impact of a blow and so on.； When you cut yourself, you may see the white color there.
   In paragraph 94 about five lines down - ：The skin of the thighs is the shape of a long sack full of paddy.； ．Paddy・ really means uncooked rice without husks.
   The next one is flesh. ：There are nine hundred pieces of flesh. As to color, it is all red, like kimsuka flowers. As to shape, the flesh of the calves is the shape of cooked rice in a palm-leaf bag.； And so on.
   Then we have sinews. ：There are nine hundred sinews.； I don・t know how they count these things. Monks do not dissect bodies. They may have learned this from physicians.
   About the middle of paragraph 99 there is the word ．tendons・. Are tendons large sinews? The P??i word here means the larger sinews. Sinews are small. The larger sinews in P??i are called ．ka??ar?・. It is tendons here. So tendons are bigger than sinews.
   The next one is bones. ：Excepting the 32 teeth bones, these consist of the remaining (number of bones).； Did you add them up? I did. There are 300. It is correct. There are 64 hand bones, 64 foot bones, 64 soft bones dependent on the flesh, 2 heel bones, then in each 2 ankle bones (So they become 4.), 2 shin bones (4), 1 knee bone (2), one thigh bone (2). Then 2 hip bones, 18 spine bones.； Are there 18 segments in a spine? What do you call them? 
Student: Vertebrae.
Teacher: Are there 18? I am asking him because he is a doctor. 
Student: (Hard to understand the answer, seemed to partially agree.) The tips of the bones are compacted together and they are regarded as only one bone.
Teacher: They may be included here. So there are 2 hip bones, 18 spine bones, 24 rib bones, 14 breast bones, 1 heart bone (sternum), 2 collar bones, 2 shoulder blade bones, 2 upper-arm bones, 2 pairs of forearm bones, 7 neck bones, 2 jaw bones, 1 nose bone, 2 eye bones, 2 ear bones, 1 frontal bone, 1 occiput bone, 9 sinciput bones. ：So there are exactly 300 bones.； The P??i does not mean ．exactly 300・. It means ．about・. We should say ：There are about 300 bones.； Please go back to paragraph 89 in chapter 6. ：This is the body・s nature: it is a collection of over 300 bones.； So there are more than 300 bones. So here the word does not mean ．exactly・ but ．about・ 300 bones. Some bones are not mentioned in the list. There are more than 300 bones in the body. The Commentary explains the bones in detail.
   The next one is bone marrow. ：This is the marrow inside the various bones. As to color, it is white.； and so on. It is not difficult to understand.
   The next one is kidney. ：This is two pieces of flesh with a single ligature. As to color, it is dull red, the color of p?libhaddhaka seeds. As to shape, it is the shape of a pair of child・s play balls; or it is the shape of mango fruits attached to a single stalk.； So it looks like kidneys. ：As to direction, it lies in the upper direction.； That  is what is bothering me. ．Upper direction・ means above the navel. Where are they located?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Let us go on. ：As to location, it is to be found on either side of the heart flesh.； But the heart is here and the kidneys are down there.
Student: Yes, but when you do an echogram or when you do a CAT scan, you can see its real location as being raised at the back. The diaphragm is not flat. The diaphragm is of curved nature because of the liver, because of the kidneys. The nature of the diaphragm is such that a very special x-ray technique used when you take an echogram. The kidneys are at the sides of the heart.
Teacher: Oh. ：As to location, it is to be found on either side of the heart flesh, being fastened by a stout sinew that starts out with one root from the neck and divides into two after going a short way.； So the translation ．kidney・ is acceptable?
Student: I think it is acceptable. The heart is not in a  stationary position. The heart is pumping. When it is contracted, it is shortened. Then it is above the level of the kidney. When it is expanded receiving the inflow of blood, then the heart is enlarged and pushed downwards. At that time the kidneys are at the sides of the heart. So it is dynamic.
Teacher: So this description is fairly scientific. I wonder how they knew this. If you cut a dead body, you cannot see direct like this.
Student: No. When you cut a dead body, you cannot see direct like this. Only in living nature can this be seen.
Teacher: Maybe they knew with supernormal knowledge, abhi???.
   The next one is heart. In Buddhist Abhidhamma the heart is said to be the seat of many types of consciousness. About the middle of the paragraph it talks about this. ：Inside it there is a hollow the size of a Poona seed・s bed where half a pasta (．Pasta・ means a handful.) of blood is kept, with which as their support the mind element and mind consciousness element occur.； There are 89 types of consciousness. Out of 89 ten have their own location or their own base for arising. For example the two types of seeing consciousness have the eyes as their base. Two types of hearing consciousness have the ears as their base and so on for the five senses. Almost all of the other types of consciousness depend upon the heart. Here ．mind element・ and ．mind consciousness element・ mean types of consciousness other than the ten - 2 seeing, 2 hearing, 2 smelling, 2 tasting, and 2 touching. (The four ar|p?vacara vip?ka are also excepted.) The heart or actually the blood in the heart is the seat of consciousness according to Abhidhamma.
   ：That in one of greedy temperament is red; that in one of hating temperament is black; that in one of deluded temperament is like water that meat has been washed in; that in one of speculative temperament is like lentil soup in color; that in one of faithful temperament is the color of [yellow] kanik?ra flowers; that in one of understanding temperament is limpid, clear, unturbid, bright, pure, like a washed gem of pure water, and it seems to shine.； This is the heart.
   The next one is liver. About four lines down - ：In sluggish people it is single and large.； What is ．sluggish・? 
Students: Lazy, torpid, slow.
Teacher: Slow in understanding or slow in physical movement? If it means slow in understanding, it is correct. Here it is mentioned in contrast with those possessed of understanding. So it is contrasting those who are not intelligent and those who are intelligent. ．Sluggish・ here means those who are not intelligent, who are maybe dull-witted. That is liver. 
   The next one we have difficulty. What is ．midriff・? I look it up in the dictionary. Midriff is defined as a part of the body, the diaphragm. I think that will do. The other meaning is that it is the middle outer portion of the front of the human body extending roughly from just below the breast to the waist-line. That is just outer. In Burmese it is translated as ．membrane・.
   ：This is the covering of the flesh, which is of two kinds, namely, the concealed and the unconcealed. As to color, both kinds are white, the color of duk|la (muslim) rags. As to shape, it is the shape of its location. As to direction, the concealed midriff lies in the upper direction, the other in both directions. As to location the concealed midriff is to be found concealing the heart and kidney.； So it looks like diaphragm, right?
Student: Yes. 
Teacher: ：The unconcealed is to be found covering the flesh under the inner skin throughout the whole body.； Between the flesh and the skin this thing is located.
Student: The unconcealed is not the diaphragm. (Suggested something in Burmese that was better than this.)
Teacher: Venerable ???aponika translates this as pleura.
Student: Pleura is the covering of the lungs.
Teacher: ：It is either of the two membranous sets each of which lines one side of the thoracic cavity and envelops the contiguous lungs reducing the friction of respiratory movements.； So it also means the upper part of the body. The concealed midriff could be the diaphragm. The unconcealed must have another name.
   The next one is the spleen. ：This is the flesh of the belly・s ．tongue・. As to color, it is blue, the color of niggu??i flowers.； and so on.
   The next one is lights. Now lights are defined as lungs especially of an animal used for food. I think it is better to translate it as lungs. ．Lights・ is an obscure word. I did not know that it meant lungs.
   ：The flesh of the lights (lungs) is divided up into two or three pieces of flesh. As to color, it is red,； and so on.
   The next one is bowel. ：This is the bowel tube; it is looped in 21 places, and in a man it is 32 hands long, and in a woman, 28 hands.； How long is the intestine?
Student: In feet it is 32 feet.
Teacher: 32 feet? It may mean feet. I don・t know. Is there a difference between the length of a man・s intestine and the length of a woman・s intestine? 
Student: I don・t know.
Teacher: There is a saying in Burmese. Please excuse me ladies. Since the intestine of women is shorter, they are more jealous. It may not be true, but that is the saying. According to this women have shorter intestines than men. It may not be true. 
   The next one is entrails or mesentery. ：This is the fastening in the places where the bowel is coiled. As to color, it is white, the color of dakas?talika (white edible water lily) roots. As to shape, it is the shape of those roots too. As to direction, it lies in the two directions. As to location, it is found inside the 21 coils of the bowel, like the string to be found inside rope-rings for wiping the feet on, sewing them together, and it fastens the bowels coils together so that they do not slip down in those working with hoes, axes, etc., as the marionette-strings do the marionette・s wooden [limbs] at the time of the marionette・s being pulled along.；
   ．Bowel・ means both large and small intestines, right?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: For this one which is better ．entrails・ or ．mesentery・?
Student: ．Mesentery・ is better.
Teacher: I will read the description of the entrails. ：The entrails are the internal organs especially the intestines.； Mesentery is defined as ：any of several folds that connect the intestines to the dorsal abdominal wall.； So ．mesentery・ is better.
   Then we have gorge. That is food which has been eaten which is in the stomach. ：This is what has been eaten, drunk, chewed and tasted, and is present in the stomach.；
   Next there is a description of the stomach. ：What is called the ．stomach・ is [a part of] the bowel-membrane, which is like the swelling [of air] produced in the middle of a length of wet cloth when it is being [twisted and] wrung out from two ends. It is smooth outside. Inside, it is like a balloon of cloth soiled by wrapping up meat refuse.；
   Now here in Burmese it is not translated as ．like a balloon of cloth・ but like ．a tassel of cloth・. The inside of the stomach is something like the surface of a towel. It is a little rough and then there is something hanging down. The inside of the stomach is something like a tassel, not a balloon of cloth. Venerable ???amoli took the P??i word ．pupphaka・ to mean balloon. ．Puppukhaka・ really means something that resembles a flower. Towels have these things. I don・t know the names of these things. So I asked a student and she said they could be called tassels. I looked it up in the dictionary and I think that is correct.
   You know in Myanmar people eat meat and the stomach is also eaten. The stomach when it is prepared for food in Myanmar is called ．rough cloth・. In Burmese it is called rough cloth. It is rough inside. If you have seen some of these things, you know that.
   The next one is dung. That is excrement. It is one of the parts of the body, but actually it is not part of the body. It is the refuse of the body.
   The next one is the brain. Brain is not supposed to be the seat of consciousness. The description of the brain is very short here. ：As to location it is to be found inside the skull, like four lumps of dough put together to correspond with the [skull・s] four sutured sections.；
   Then we have bile. ：There are two kinds of bile: local (stationary) bile and free (mobile) bile. Herein, as to color, the local bile is the color of thick madhuka oil; the free bile is the color of faded ?kul? flowers,； and so on. There are two kinds of bile. ：As to location, the free bile spreads, like a drop of oil on water all over the body except for the fleshless parts of the head hairs, body hairs, teeth, nails and the hard dry skin. When it is disturbed, the eyes become yellow and twitch, and there is shivering and itching of the body. (That is when the free bile is disturbed, when the free bile is not in good order.) The local bile (That is the real bile.) is situated near the flesh of the liver between the heart and the lights (lungs). It is found in the bile container (gall bladder), which is like a large kos?tak? (loofah) ground pip. When it is disturbed, beings go crazy and demented, they throw off conscience and shame and do the undoable, speak the unspeakable, and think the unthinkable.； When people go mad, we say his bile is disturbed or something like that.
   The next one is phlegm. It is described as something located in the stomach over what we have eaten.
   Then we have pus. ：Pus is produced by decaying blood.； That is not difficult to understand.
   Then there is blood. ：There are two kinds of blood: stored blood and mobile blood. Herein, as to color, stored blood is the color of cooked and thickened lac solution; mobile blood is the color of clear lac solution.；
   Some lines down - ：The mobile blood permeates the whole of the clung-to (kammically-acquired) body.； It is the direct translation of the P??i word ．up?di??aka・. It simply means the living body. ．Clung-to, kammically-acquired body・ simply means the living body.
Student: ．Clung to・ means grasped?
Teacher: ．Clung-to・ really means the result of kamma here. You know the literal meaning of the word ．up?di??a・ is clung-to. It is clung to by kamma. That means the result of kamma. There are four kinds of material properties - those caused by kamma, those caused by consciousness, those caused by food, those caused by temperature or climate. It simply means here a living body, not a dead body, or things like trees, rocks and others.
   Then there is sweat. Sweat is not difficult to understand.
   The next one is fat. ．Fat・ here means solid fat. There are two kinds of fat. This one is solid, a thick unguent.
   The next one is tears. Their location is in the eyes.
   Next there is grease. That is melted unguent. In Burmese we say clear oil. The other one, fat, is thick oil, thick unguent. This one is thin oil. ：As to location, it is to be found mostly on the palms of the hands, backs of the hands, soles of the feet, backs of the feet, tip of the nose, forehead, and points of the shoulders.； It is something like sweat, but it is not sweat. Sometimes your hands are wet. That is what is called ．grease・ here. When you put on shoes, you have that kind of grease there.
   Then there is spittle or saliva. The next one is snot. Does mucus in the nose come from the brain? It may not be. Here it says ：This is impurity that trickles out from the brain.；
Student There is a long explanation of this, but it is true. The brain has its own fluid. It has spinal fluid. It has its own canals. The formations of these brain fluids are somewhat screened and filtered, like the kidneys filter and screen our blood to form urine. The mucus is the screened product of the brain. Urine is the screened product of the kidneys.
Teacher: So this is correct that it oozes or trickles out of the brain.
Student: It is somewhat correct.
Teacher: The next one is oil of the joints. It is oil that stays in the joints. It is translated by Venerable ???aponika as synovial fluid. I looked that word up in the dictionary. It said synovia is a clear, viscid, lubricating fluid secreted by membranes in joint cavities, sheets of tendons, and bursas. It is called synovial fluid. 
Student: Particularly in the knee joints when you get older, the fluid is somewhat reduced. When you sit and stand up, you can hear creaking.
Teacher: Yes. It is mentioned here. When a man gets up or sits down, moves forward or backward, bends or stretches, then his bones creak. When I walk there is a creak in the ankle.
   The last one is urine. There is one thing. I am not happy with the description of the bladder here. About five lines down it say ：While the urinary secretion from the body enters the bladder, its way of entry is not evident.； There are two pipes going into the bladder from the kidneys, right?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: Here it says that its way of entry is not evident, but it is very clear that urine enters the bladder from the kidneys by way of these pipes.
Student: It may mean that its way of entry is not evident. Actually it is difficult to explain. It is not evident. If it is evident there will be reflux. The nature is so arranged that the entry is not visible. The entry is not evident. If it were evident, the urine from the bladder can reflux back when it is full. The mechanism is so arranged that it is not evident.
Teacher: So it is not like water dripping from a pipe?
Student: No. Because if the bladder is full the urine will be refluxed back to the kidney. It never happens in a normal person. Only when the entrance is ruined or damaged is there a reflux.
Teacher: There is something like a valve.
Student: Yes. There is something very, very complicated. It may mean that the entry is not evident.
Teacher: We are fortunate today because we have a doctor here. 
   Then there is the arising of absorption. Only first jh?na can arise through the practice of this meditation, not the second, third and fourth jh?nas. 
   The learning and the counterpart signs are described in paragraph 141. ：Then, as he gives his attention to them again and again as ．repulsive, repulsive・, emphasizing the process of ．successive leaving・, etc., eventually absorption arises in him. Herein, the appearance of head hairs, etc., as to color, shape, direction, location and delimitation, is the learning sign; their appearance as repulsive in all aspects is the counterpart sign.； There are two kind of signs - learning sign and counterpart sign. He gets only the first jh?na.
   Then there is the very short story of the Elder Mallaka. ：That Elder, it seems, took the Elder Abhaya, the D?gha Reciter, by the hand, and after saying ．Friend Abhaya, first learn this matter・, he went on ．The Elder Mallaka is an obtainer of 32 jh?nas in the 32 parts.  If he enters upon one by night and one by day, he goes on entering upon them for over a fortnight; but if he enters upon one each day, he goes on entering upon them for over a month.；
   Then there are the benefits of this meditation. ：And the bhikkhu who is devoted to this mindfulness occupied with the body is a conqueror of boredom and delight, and boredom does not conquer him; he dwells transcending boredom as it arises. He is a conqueror of fear and dread, and fear and dread do not conquer him; he dwells transcending fear and dread as they arise. He is the one who bears cold and heat.. who endures.. arisen bodily feelings that are menacing to life； and so on. This Sutta comes from the Majjhima Nik?ya (Middle Length Sayings)
   ：He becomes an obtainer of the four jh?nas based on the color of the head hairs, etc.； Although a person cannot get second, third and fourth jh?nas by practicing this kind of meditation, yet he can get the four jh?nas, if he concentrates on the color aspect of these parts, not on the repulsiveness. For example when you look at hair,  you concentrate on the color of the hair as black, or dark, or something. In that case you can get all four kinds of jh?nas. That is why it is mentioned here. ：He becomes an obtainer of the four jh?nas based on the color aspect of the head hairs, etc., and he comes to penetrate the six kinds of direct knowledge.； That is supernormal knowledge.
                   ：So let a man, if he is wise,
                     Untiringly devote his days
                     To mindfulness of body which
                     Rewards him in so many ways.
   This is the section dealing with mindfulness occupied with the body in the detailed treatise.；
Student: So this treatise is saying that we have to go through the 32 parts in order to obtain the first jh?na.
Teacher: No. There are other subjects of meditation. If you practice this meditation, you will only get the first jh?na. There are other kinds of meditation like kasi?a meditation by which you can get all four jh?nas. This meditation can give you only the first jh?na because it is so gross. It is so gross that you need initial application (vitakka) for your mind to be on the object, just as you need a pole to keep a boat in a swift current. That is why you cannot get second, third and fourth jh?nas with this meditation. 
   If you concentrate on the color aspect, you can get the other jh?nas. For example if you concentrate on the blood, you don・t say ．blood, blood, blood・, but you say ．red, red, red.・ That becomes color kasi?a meditation. When it becomes color kasi?a meditation, then you can get the four jh?nas. 
   Next week we will study up to paragraph 185.
Student: The 32 parts of the body is very interesting with regard to the groupings 5,5,5,5,6,6. The first set is the outgrowth from the same tissue. These five things emerge from the same tissue in the fetus.*

                                    S?dhu!           S?dhu!           S?dhu!
(Tape 18 / Ps: 145 -185)

   Today・s section on mindfulness of breathing is interesting. The mindfulness of  breathing meditation has become very popular in Myanmar as well as in other countries. Those who practice vipassan? meditation actually begin with some kind of mindfulness on breathing meditation. One begins with keeping the mind on the breath. Or as a variation of keeping the mind on the breath one keeps the mind on the rising and falling movements of the abdomen. That is also breathing meditation. 
   However in this book, The Path of Purification, mindfulness of the breath is treated as tranquillity or serenity meditation (samatha meditation) and not as vipassan? meditation. So the description that follows, most of the description, is for tranquillity meditation. 
   The breathing meditation is taught in different Suttas in the Sutta Pi?aka or the Basket of Discourses. The author took a passage from one of the Suttas and commented on it.
   ：Now comes the description of the development of mindfulness of breathing as a meditation subject. It has been recommended by the Blessed One thus: ．And, bhikkhus, this concentration through mindfulness of breathing, when developed and practiced much, is both peaceful and sublime, it is an unadulterated blissful abiding, and it banishes at once and stills evil unprofitable thoughts as soon as they arise・.； That is from one Sutta.
   Now let us read the next one. ：It has been described by the Blessed One as having 16 bases thus (or 16 methods mentioned in the Sutta): ．And how developed, bhikkhus, how practiced much is concentration through mindfulness of breathing both peaceful and sublime, an unadulterated blissful abiding, banishing at once and stilling evil unprofitable thoughts as soon as they arise・?； We will examine the translation later.
   ：Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty place, sits down; having folded his legs crosswise, sets his body erect, established mindfulness in front of him (Actually it is ．established mindfulness towards the meditation object・.), ever mindful, he breathes in; mindful he breathes out.； Here also we should say ．ever・ - ：ever mindful he breathes in; ever mindful he breathes out.； This is the basic practice.
   Then come the 16 methods. ：(1) Breathing in long, he knows, ．I breathe in long・; or breathing out long, he knows, ．I breathe out long・. (That is the first method.)  (2) Breathing in short, he knows, ．I breathe in short・; or breathing out short, he knows, ．I breathe out short・. (3) He trains thus ．I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body・; he trains thus ．I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body・. (4) He trains thus ．I shall breathe in tranquilizing the bodily formation・;  he trains thus ．I shall breathe out tranquilizing the bodily formation・.； These are the four basic methods for mindfulness on breathing meditation.
   There are three more sets with four methods in each set. They deal with the three remaining kinds of foundations of mindfulness. There are four foundations of mindfulness - contemplation on the body, contemplation on the feelings, contemplation on consciousness, contemplation on dhamma objects. The first four have to do with contemplation on the body. The second four deal with feelings. The third four is contemplation on consciousness and the fourth four is contemplation on dhamma objects. We will come to them later.
   The first four methods are the most important for a beginner. For one who wants to practice mindfulness meditation these four methods are treated or explained in detail in this book, The Visuddhi Magga as well as in other Commentaries. 
   ：The description [of development] is complete in all respects, however, only if it is given in due course after a commentary on the text. So it is given here introduced by a commentary on the [first part of the] text.； First the Commentary explains the words. It gives the meaning of the words and the explanations pertaining to the meanings. Later, not today, next week we will come to the method of development.
   First the Commentator commented on the text itself and then described how to practice mindfulness of breathing meditation as a tranquillity or serenity meditation. Now we will be doing the word commentary.
   ：And how developed, bhikkhus, how practiced much, is concentration through mindfulness of breathing: here in the first place ．how・ is a question showing desire to explain in detail the development of concentration through mindfulness of breathing in its various forms. Developed, bhikkhus, .. is concentration through mindfulness of breathing: this shows the thing that is being asked about out of desire to explain it in various forms.； Buddha would put forth a question. This question is not expecting an answer from the listeners. He wanted to give the answer himself. So first he would ask the question and then he would give the answer.
   ： ．Developed・ means aroused or increased.； That means practice, practice again and again. ：Concentration through mindfulness of breathing [literally, breathing-mindfulness concentration] (In P??i it is ?n?p??asati sam?dhi. ．?n?p??a・ means breathing. ．Sati・ means mindfulness. And ．sam?dhi・ means concentration.
   ：It is either concentration associated with mindfulness that discerns breathing, or it is concentration on mindfulness of breathing.； Actually they mean the same thing.
   Concentration is a mental factor or mental state. It is associated with another mental state which is mindfulness. So we have concentration, mindfulness and there is consciousness. When you practice meditation and your meditation is good, your consciousness is accompanied by concentration and mindfulness. ：It is concentration on mindfulness of breathing.； That is the same thing.
   ：Practiced much: practiced again and again.； These are word explanations. Sometimes it is strange in a translation. The translator has to repeat the word because there is no word, no synonym for the original P??i words. P??i is rich in synonyms in some respects. So one synonym after another is given when something is explained. It is difficult to translate them into another language.
   ：Both peaceful and sublime (santo c・eva pa??to ca)； - I think ．both・ is not correct here. There is the word ．eva・. ．Eva・ means only. He translated eva as ．quite・ in another place - ．quite secluded from sensual pleasures, quite secluded from sense objects・ and so on. Here also we should say ．quite peaceful and quite sublime・. So it is ：peaceful only and sublime only；; that is what is meant here. It is peaceful only, not unpeaceful, sublime only, not unsublime. Sometimes the word ．eva・ is used just for emphasis.
Student: Could it be ．very peaceful・ and ．very sublime・?
Teacher: ．Very・, no. You want to emphasize it. It is really peaceful and not unpeaceful. ：The two words should be understood as governed by the word ．quite・ (eva).； not ．both・.We should correct or change it to the word ．quite・ instead of ．both・. ．Quite peaceful・ and ．quite sublime means peaceful only and sublime only.
   ：What is meant? Unlike foulness which as a meditation subject is peaceful and sublime only by penetration； - that means you practice foulness meditation and when you get jh?na or attainments, that is peaceful and sublime. At the attainment level it is peaceful and sublime. The object of the foulness meditation is not peaceful nor sublime because it is a dead body or a corpse which is gross.
   ：Unlike foulness, which as a meditation subject is peaceful and sublime only by penetration, but is neither peaceful nor sublime in its object since its object [in the learning stage] is gross, and [after that] its object is repulsiveness - unlike that, this is not unpeaceful or unsublime in any way but on the contrary it is peaceful, stilled and quiet both on account of the peacefulness of its object and on account of the peacefulness of that one of its factors called penetration.； That means the object itself is peaceful and the attainment also is peaceful. This is because it is the breath which is not gross. It is peaceful. The breath itself is peaceful and sublime and when you get attainment, that also is peaceful and sublime.
   ：And it is sublime, something one cannot have enough of.； That is the meaning of the P??i word ．pa??ta・. You see the word ．pa??to・ above at the beginning of paragraph 148. The word pa??to is usually translated as sublime, but the literal meaning is ．something which we cannot have enough of・. That means we want to practice again and again and we are not satiated with it. That is what is meant here.
   ：It  is an unadulterated blissful abiding: it has no adulteration, thus it is unadulterated. It is unalloyed, unmixed, particular, special. Here it is not a question of peacefulness to be reached through preliminary work [as with the kasi?as] or through access [as with foulness, for instance].； To get peacefulness with kasi?a meditation or foulness meditation you have to do some work before you get peacefulness. With kasi?a meditation you have to prepare a kasi?a and then go to a place and sit and meditate. With foulness meditation also you have to look at a corpse and so on. Only after that do you get unification of mind and then you get peacefulness. Breathing meditation is not like that. ：It is peaceful and sublime in its own individual essence too starting with the very first attention given to it.； The moment you sit down and practice meditation on breathing, you are peaceful.
   ：But some say that it is ．unadulterated・ because it is unalloyed, possessed of nutritive value and sweet in its individual essence too. So it should be understood to be ．unadulterated・ and a ．blissful abiding・ since it leads to the obtaining of bodily and mental bliss (That means bodily and mental peacefulness.) with every moment of absorption.；
   There is a footnote. ： ．Some・ is said with reference to the inmates of the Uttara (Northern) monastery [in Anur?dhapura].； Historically the Commentaries we now use were written at a monastery called ．The Great Monastery・, in Anur?dhapura which is in Sri Lanka. At one time some monks went away from The Great Monastery which was the central place of learning for monks at that time. They divided themselves from The Great Monastery. They founded two monasteries. One was to the north of The Great Monastery and one I think was to the east of The Great Monastery. The large stupas can still be seen in Anur?dhapura. ．Uttara Monastery・ here means the monastery called ．Abhayagiri・. It is not known as Northern Monastery actually. Northern Monastery is not the name. Since that monastery is located to the north of The Great Monastery, it is referred to here in the Sub-Commentary as the Northern Monastery. Actually it is Abhayagiri. They have different opinions about some teachings in some cases. They do not conform to the tradition handed down or accepted at The Great Monastery. Those who lived in Abhayagiri or the Northern Monastery thought in this way, just a little difference, not too much.
   In paragraph 150 we have ：as soon as they arise.； The P??i word here is like saying ．each and every one that arises・. In P??i the word is repeated. That means something that arises and arises. It is something like that. So here ：each and every thought that arises；. Here ．arise・ does not mean that it really arises, but it is in a latent state. There is a potential for these unwholesome or unprofitable thoughts to arise. And so it is explained by ：whenever they are not suppressed；. 
   There are three kinds of abandonment of unwholesome mental states. The first one is by substitution. That means you substitute something wholesome for something unwholesome. When you have wholesome thoughts, you do not have unwholesome thoughts. That is abandoning by substitution. We say it is momentary abandoning. Just for one moment you may abandon the unwholesome thought. The next one is abandoning by suppression or temporary abandoning. In that case the abandoning lasts longer than in the first one. The last one is total cutting off, total eradication. That is the last abandonment. So there are three kinds of abandoning. Here what is meant is the second abandoning, abandoning by suppression. Here the meditation can abandon or banish the unprofitable thoughts as they arise. That means not that they really arise, but that they have the potential to arise. By the practice of meditation their arising is blocked. They are not given chance to arise. That is what is meant here. When unwholesome thoughts have arisen in us, then it has arisen and we cannot do anything about that. Before arising we do not let it arise. That is what is meant here although the word ．arise・ is used.
   ：It banishes at once: it banishes, suppresses, at that very moment. Stills: it thoroughly calms; or else, when eventually brought to fulfillment by the Noble Path, it cuts off, because of partaking of penetration; it tranquilizes, is what is meant.； This or else in the following mean the total cutting off or abandonment. Here a person reaches the Noble Path. At the moment of Noble Path he is able to eradicate, cut off, mental defilements or unprofitable thoughts all together. Here it is the total cutting off.
   ：In brief, however, the meaning due here is this: Bhikkhus in what way, in what manner, by what system, is concentration through mindfulness of breathing developed, in what way is it practiced much, that it is quite.. as soon as they arise?；
   ：Herein, here bhikkhus, a bhikkhu means, bhikkhu, in this dispensation, a bhikkhu (a monk).； In this book, in The Path of Purification, the commentator did not say anything more about the word ．bhikkhu・. In another Commentary, the Commentary to the Mah? Satipa??h?na Sutta (The Sutta on the Four Foundations of Mindfulness), it is stated that ．bhikkhu・ here does not necessarily mean an ordained monk, but anybody who practices mindfulness meditation, anybody who follows the advice of the Buddha, anybody who practices the teachings of the Buddha can be called a ．bhikkhu・. So in that case a bhikkhu does not necessarily mean an ordained monk. Anybody who practices meditation can be called a ．bhikkhu・. But since this book is for bhikkhus, for monks, the commentator does not say anything about this.
   Nowadays when people read Suttas and the Buddha always addresses monks, they feel left out. They are not satisfied with that. They do not like that. The Buddha speaks to monks and not to lay people they think. You know, the Buddha lived with monks. So when he talked, he talked mostly to monks. That does not mean that lay people are left out. ：Herein, here bhikkhus, a bhikkhu means, bhikkhus, in this dispensation, a bhikkhu.； So here it is a monk, but anybody who practices meditation, who follows the teachings of the Buddha, can be called a monk.
   ：For this word ．here・ signifies the [Buddha・s] dispensation as the prerequisite for a person to produce concentration through mindfulness of breathing in all its modes； and so on. ．Here・ means this dispensation that is in Buddhism. It is said that only in Buddhism can be found the four foundations of mindfulness and also the four Persons who are enlightened.
   ：For this is said: ．Bhikkhus, only here is there an ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a third ascetic, here a fourth ascetic.； They mean the Stream Winner, the Once-Returner, the Non-Returner and the Arahant.
   ：Other dispensations are devoid of ascetics.； That means there are no enlightened persons in other dispensations. ：That is why it was said above ．in this dispensation a bhikkhu・.；
   ：Gone to a forest or to an empty place； - this passage shows a suitable or an appropriate place for meditation.
   Then a monk・s mind is described as unruly and wild. A simile is given of a calf tied with a rope to a strong post. In the same way we tie our mind to the strong post of breathing with the rope of mindfulness. So mindfulness is like a rope. Breathing in and out is like a post. Our mind is like the calf. We try to keep our mind on the object by mindfulness.
   In paragraph 155 ：Or alternatively, the mindfulness of breathing as a meditation subject - which is foremost among the various meditation subjects of all Buddhas, [some] Pacceka Buddhas and [some] Buddhas・ disciples； - the word ．some・ in brackets is taken from the Sub-Commentary. It is said that all Buddhas practice mindfulness of breathing meditation. They all practice mindfulness of breathing and get jh?nas. Then they change over to vipassan? after attaining jh?na. But for the Pacceka Buddhas and the other disciples it may not be breathing meditation. For some it may be breathing meditation, but for others it may not be breathing meditation. There are other kinds of meditation too. It is said in the books that all Buddhas practice breathing meditation.
   If you read some Suttas in The Middle Length Sayings, you will find the Buddha relating his practice to a prince. In that Sutta he said that first he practiced breathing meditation. Then he got first jh?na, second jh?na, third jh?na, fourth jh?na. After that he got the supernormal knowledge of remembering past lives; then he saw people dying in one life and being reborn in another life. Only after that did he dwell on Dependent Origination, practicing vipassan? on each of the twelve links. Then he gained enlightenment. It is said that all Buddhas practice breathing meditation but not all Pacceka Buddhas or Buddhas・ disciples.
   ．As a basis for attaining distinction・ means enlightenment. ：It is not easy to develop without leaving the neighborhood of villages, which resound with the noises of women, men, elephants, horses, etc.； We need to go to a place where we do not have such noises. ：Noise being a thorn to jh?na； - actually it is a thorn to first jh?na. ：Whereas in the forest away from a village a meditator can at his ease set about discerning this meditation subject.； A forest is a suitable place for meditation. This meditation is difficult to practice and so we need quietness.
   Then the author explains with a simile, ：For the Blessed One is like a master of the art of building sites； and so on. These passages are not difficult to understand.
   Paragraph 158 ：Herein, gone to the forest is gone to any kind of forest possessing the bliss of seclusion among the kind of forest characterized thus ．Having gone out beyond the boundary post, all that is forest・.； When we say ．forest・, there are at least two definitions, one given in Abhidhamma and one given in Vinaya. 
   The first one is from Abhidhamma. In Abhidhamma it is said ：having gone out beyond the boundary post；. There are gateposts outside the villages. That which is outside the gateposts is forest. It may be very close to the village. Still it is called a ．forest・. 
   There is another definition in Vinaya. ：A forest abode is five hundred bow lengths distant.； We should have ．at least・ there. He left out a word. ：A forest abode is at least five hundred bow lengths distant.・
   One bow length is said to be four cubits. That is about six feet. So five hundred multiplied by six is three thousand. In order for a place to be called a ．forest・ it must be about three thousand feet away from human villages, towns or cities. So there is a difference between the forest explained in Abhidhamma and Vinaya. We came across this in the second chapter.
Student: I was thinking about this. It is about ten football fields.
Teacher: Ten football fields! Oh.
   ：To the root of a tree: gone to the vicinity of a tree. To an empty place, gone to an ．empty place・ if he has gone to any of the remaining seven kinds of abode (resting place)； - they are given in the footnote.
   Now the sitting position is dealt with. ：Then he sits down, etc., indicating a posture that is peaceful and tends neither to idleness nor to agitation.； So sitting position is the best for the practice of meditation.
   ：Then  he said having folded his legs crosswise, etc., to show firmness in the sitting position, easy occurrence of the in-breaths and out-breaths, and the means for discerning the object.； When your breathing is going smoothly, then you can concentrate on it easily.
   ：Herein, crosswise in the sitting position with the thighs fully locked； - it does not say in the lotus position, but I think it means the lotus position because your ．thighs fully locked・ means the lotus position. Most of the Buddha images that you see are in the full lotus position. It may mean the full lotus position here.
   ：Folded: having locked. Set his body erect: having placed the upper part of the body erect with the 18 backbones resting end to end. (That means one over the other.) For when he is seated like this, his skin, flesh and sinews are not twisted, and so feelings (．Feelings・ means painful feelings.) that would arise moment by moment if they were twisted do not arise. That being so, his mind becomes unified,； and so on. Sitting position is recommended and said to be the best for meditation.
   ：Established mindfulness in front of him； - ．in front of him・ means towards the object, so ：established mindfulness towards the object.； It is not ．in front of him・ actually. So ：having placed mindfulness towards the meditation subject； is correct.
   ：Or alternatively, the meaning can be treated here too according to the method of explanation given in the Pa?isambhid?.； This book, the Pa?isambhid?, will be quoted many times in the Visuddhi Magga. This book is said to have been preached by the Venerable S?riputta. It is included in the Sutta Pi?aka. Although it is included as among the words of the Buddha, it actually was taught by Venerable S?riputta.
Student: So it is not in the Abhidhamma Pi?aka.
Teacher: Oh, no. It is included in Sutta Pi?aka. I just read about this today in one book, P??i Literature and Language. There the author said that it is more like Abhidhamma than Sutta. That is not quite so. It looks like Sutta Pi?aka, but its language is different. The usage is a little different than in the Commentaries, although it is treated as a Commentary on some of the Buddha・s teachings. Venerable Buddhaghosa, the author of The Path of Purification, had great respect for this book. So he always quoted from this book whenever there is a quotation to be made.
Student: Is it translated into English?
Teacher: Yes. I think recently a translation has come out. 
   According to that book the phrase here means ．making mindfulness thoroughly controlled・ and ．getting out of opposition・. Here the translation says ．outlet・. What is ．outlet・? ．Outlet・ means some hole or some door you go through. Here it does not mean ．outlet・, but outgoing or getting out of. Mindfulness is described here. Mindfulness must be well-controlled and it must be getting out of opposition. ．Opposition・ here means forgetfulness. Mindfulness must be strong and it must get out of forgetfulness. So ：making mindfulness thoroughly controlled and getting out of opposition； is what is meant here.
   Then we have breathing in long and breathing out long. ：Word Commentary Continued - First Tetrad； - this is the first set of the four methods of breathing meditation. Here breathing long and breathing short can be understood by way of extent. Those who have long or big bodies, for such beings, the breathing in and out may be long. For small animals or insects it may be very short. With regard to human beings we can understand by way of time. Sometimes our breathing is long and sometimes our breathing is short, long and short in time, because human beings are more or less of the same size. So we cannot say there is a difference in the extent of breathing in and out between human beings.
   In paragraph 164 ： ．Ass?sa is the wind issuing out; pass?sa is the wind entering in・ is said in the Vinaya Commentary. But in the Suttanta Commentaries it is given in the opposite sense・.； In Vinaya Commentary ass?sa is out-breath and pass?sa is in-breath. But in Suttanta Commentaries ass?sa is in-breath and pass?sa is out-breath. 
   ：Herein, when any infant comes out from the mother・s womb, first the wind from within goes out and subsequently the wind from without enters in with fine dust, strikes the palate and is extinguished [with the infant・s sneezing].； Do infants sneeze after being born? I don・t know. It・s OK.
   The Commentary continues without telling us which is to be preferred. Should we take ass?sa as out-breath or in-breath? There is what I call familiarity with the tradition or the manner of Commentators. Whenever a Commentator gives two or more opinions, the one he puts last is the one he preferred.  We must understand that. If he doesn・t say anything, we must take it that he prefers the last one.
   There is another proof of ass?sa being in-breath and pass?sa being out-breath. That we will find in paragraph 167. ：Now this bhikkhu knows ．I breathe in, I breathe out, long while breathing in and breathing out long in nine ways. And the development of the Foundations of Mindfulness consisting in Contemplation of the Body should be understood to be perfected in one aspect in him who knows thus, according as it is said in the Pa?isambhid?.；
   Whenever I see footnotes in small print, I am afraid because these are from the Sub-Commentaries. The Sub-Commentaries are more difficult to understand. I was afraid that he might make some mistakes in translating and he did make mistakes. I cannot go into details about this. In footnote 46 about eight lines from the bottom appears the phrase ．but some say・. That should be in front of ：The mind turns away; and then ：the mind turns away from the breaths； and so on. ．But some say・ should be there. ：But some say the mind turns away from the breaths, which have reached the point at which their manifestation needs investigating owing to their gradually increasing subtlety.； That is what the other people say. But the truth is ：when the in-breaths and out-breaths have reached a subtler state owing to the influence of the meditation and the counterpart sign; for when that has arisen, the mind turns away from the normal breaths.； I don・t know why he made that mistake. ．But some say・ should be in front. Then there is a long quotation from the Pa?isambhid?.
   In paragraph 171 ：He trains thus ．I shall breathe in..I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body・: he trains thus, I shall breathe in making known, making plain, the beginning, middle and end of the entire in-breath body. I shall breathe out making known, making plain, the beginning, middle and the end of the entire out-breath body, thus he trains. Making them known, making them plain, in this way he both breathes in and breathes out with consciousness associated with knowledge (or understanding). That is why it is said ．He trains thus ：I shall breathe in.. I shall breathe out..；・
   The English translation is ．experiencing the whole body・ but the explanation given in the Commentary is not experiencing but making clear・, making known, making plain. That means trying to see the breath clearly. The P??i word ．pa?isa?vedeti・ can mean to experience but here it is explained to make clear, to make evident. So it should be ．making clear or making plain the whole breath body・.
   Now we come to the ．breath body・. The P??i word is just ．k?ya・. ．K?ya・ just means body. The Commentary explains it as breath body. ．Body・ here does not mean the whole body but just the breath. The breath here is called ．body・. The P??i word ．k?ya・ means group. Our body is a group of different parts. The breath also is a group of particles, small particles of matter. So the breath is also called ．k?ya・. So the word ．k?ya・ here means the breath body not the whole body. The Commentary explains in this way. And the Commentary is based on the Pa?isambhid?magga just mentioned. In the Pa?isambhid?magga it is also explained as meaning breath body. 
   Now there are people who say that it must mean the whole body. They sweep the body or look all over the body for sensations. Observing the sensations in the body is not against vipassan?, not against the teachings of the Buddha. But if you say that observing sensations going all through the body is according to this passage, then you are wrong. This passage has to do with breathing meditation. ．Breathing meditation・ means meditation taking breathing as an object. If you look for sensations, if you observe sensations, you are no longer watching the breath. So it is no longer mindfulness of breathing meditation. It becomes another kind of contemplation on the body or it may be contemplation on feeling. So in practice you can do the sweeping of the body if you have attained a certain degree of concentration. You can watch sensations in the body. It is not against vipassan?, but it is not according to this passage. This passage is shown with regard to breathing meditation.
Student: This passage is for samatha meditation?
Teacher: Yes.
Student: I find it hard to think of breathing meditation as samatha and not vipassan? because the object is changing.
Teacher: No. In breathing meditation as samatha meditation the object does not change. You keep the mind at the tip of the nose and the object of the meditation is the breath, the in-breath and out-breath. You don・t pay attention to other objects. You try to keep your mind on the object. Next week we will see how you may count in one, out one, in two, out two and so on (in order to keep the mind on the breath). So you take the breath as object only. It is samatha meditation.
Student: If you are aware of the body at all, it would have to be vipassan?.
Teacher: That・s right.
Student: When you divided it at the beginning as the four foundations of mindfulness, the first was the breath and the second was feeling?
Teacher: Feeling, yes.
Student: So this has something to do with this passage when you talk about the body?
Teacher: Yes. When we talk about the body, we are talking about the breath body, not the whole body. Also here seeing or being aware of the beginning, middle and end of the breath, that means keeping your mind here and when it goes in and goes out past this point, you try to see this as the beginning, middle and end of the breath. It is like that. We cannot say that his passage means the whole body, that in this passage ．k?ya・ means the whole body.
   To one only the beginning may be clear. To another only the middle may be clear or the end may be clear. To yet another all stages may be clear. We should be like that last person. That is what is explained in paragraph 172.
   Now paragraph 173 ：herein, he trains: he strives, he endeavors in this way. Or else the restraint here in one such as this is training in the higher virtue, his concentration (not consciousness) is training in the higher consciousness, his understanding is training in the higher understanding. So he trains in, repeats, develops, repeatedly practices, these three kinds of training, on that object, by means of that mindfulness, by means of that attention. This is how the meaning should be regarded here.；
   You know the three trainings. They are morality, concentration and wisdom. They are called ．the three trainings・. Here they are called ．the three higher trainings・. Here P?timokkha restraint is called the restraint in higher virtue, the training in higher virtue. The jh?nas are called the training in higher consciousness. Enlightenment is called the training in higher understanding. So ．training in higher consciousness・ means attainment of jh?nas and other sam?pattis.
   ：Herein, in the first part of the system (#1 & #2) he should only breathe in and breathe out and not do anything else at all, and it is only afterwards that he should apply himself to the arousing of knowledge, and so on. Consequently the present tense is used here in the text: He knows ．I breathe in・..he knows ．I breathe out・； He is just to know that he is breathing in and breathing out, breathing in and breathing out. Just that. But in this method he must apply himself or he must train himself. He must make effort, special effort to make clear the beginning, middle and end of each in-breath and out-breath. That is why the future tense is used - ：I shall breathe in, I shall breathe out.； That means there is some effort involved here, not just being mindful of in-breaths and out-breaths. In addition to being mindful of in-breaths and out-breaths he has to know, to clearly see the beginning, middle and the end.
   In paragraph 175 ：He trains thus ．I shall breathe in.. shall breathe out tranquilizing the bodily formations・.； ．Tranquilizing the bodily formations・ does not mean that you must deliberately make the breath subtle. Actually you cannot do that. What is meant is just to pay attention to the breath. When your mind calms down, the breath will become more and more subtle. That is what is meant here. You cannot make them subtle by breathing softly or something like that. That will come with practice. You don・t have to do it.
   The word ．bodily formation・ is used here. Do you know what that means? What is ．bodily formation・?  The breath here is called ．bodily formation・. That is why it is difficult to correctly understand in some places. The same word is used and has different meanings. The P??i word is ．k?ya sa~kh?ra・. I think you are familiar with the word ．sa~kh?ra・. ．K?ya sa~kh?ra・ is translated as bodily formation. I don・t know what ．formation・ means. Is it the act of forming or something which is formed? Or both?
Student: Something that is formed.
Teacher: Oh, something that is formed. Here it means something that is formed. ．Bodily formation・ means bodily formed. That means the breath is said to be caused by mind. There are four causes of material properties - kamma, mind, climate and food. So mind is one of the causes of material properties. Breathing in and breathing out is said to be caused by mind. Although breathing in and breathing out is caused by mind, it needs the physical body to arise. If there is no body, there can be no breathing at all. So it is described as formed by the body. That means formed with the help of the body.
   So in the footnote ： ．Bodily formation・: the in-breath and out-breath. For although it is consciousness-originated (although it is caused by consciousness, mind), it is nevertheless called ．bodily formation・ since its existence is bound up with the kamma-born body.； It is not ．kamma-born body. It is bound up with the physical body, not necessarily kamma-born. So ：with the physical body and it is formed with that as the means.； If there is no physical body, there can be no breath at all. It is said to be formed by, or made by, or maybe conditioned by the physical body. So it is called ．bodily formation・.
Student: Is there any kind of body that is not kamma-born?
Teacher: There are material properties which are caused by kamma, for example the sensitivity in the eye, sensitivity in the ear. They are caused by kamma. Voice is caused by consciousness or mind as well as by some other causes. When a rock hits against something, there is also noise. That is not caused by mind, but when I speak, my voice is caused by mind. There are four causes of material properties. Since breath is a material property, it must have a cause. According to Abhidhamma it is caused by consciousness or is consciousness-originated. Although it is caused by consciousness, it is not called ．consciousness formation・ here, but it is called ．bodily formation・ because it has to depend upon the physical body for its arising. It is not necessarily kamma-born body, but it is physical body.
   Before we practice meditation or if we do not practice meditation, our breathing is said to be gross. But when we sit down and practice meditation and try to discern the breathing, then it becomes more and more subtle. It will become so subtle the meditator has to investigate whether it exists or not. Sometimes yogis are alarmed or afraid because they say they that have stopped breathing. They are not sure that they are alive or living at all.
   The breathing is different from the other objects of meditation like the kasi?as, the kasi?a disks, dead bodies and so on. Other objects become clearer with the development of concentration. The better your concentration becomes the clearer these objects or the images of these objects become. It is the opposite with the breath. The better your concentration, the more subtle the breath becomes and the more difficult it is to see. You have to apply effort and understanding so that you do not lose it. It will become so subtle that you will wonder whether you are breathing at all or whether you have stopped breathing. It will reach such a state.
   ：Why is that? Because previously at the time when he has still not discerned (That means when he did not practice meditation.) there is no concern in him, no reaction (．No reaction・ means no adverting, no thinking of that.) , no attention, no reviewing, to the effect that ．I am [progressively] tranquilizing each grosser bodily formation・. But when he has discerned, there is. So his bodily formation at the time when he has discerned is subtle in comparison with that at the time when he has not.； So the breathing becomes subtle, more and more subtle with the growth of concentration. You do not have to make them subtle. You actually cannot make them subtle, but you just keep your mind on the breath and try to discern it thoroughly, to see clearly the beginning, the middle and the end of it. When you reach the next stage, it will become very subtle. You do not make them subtle, but they will become subtle. So you have to train yourself ：I shall breathe in tranquilizing the bodily formation；, but not really tranquilizing. They just become tranquil. They just become subtle.
   In paragraph 179 the relative subtlety is given. ：In discerning [the meditation subject the formation] is gross, and it is subtle [by comparison] in the first jh?na access.； That means when you first practice meditation, the breath is gross. When you reach to access concentration, it becomes subtle. Then by comparison it is gross at that stage of access concentration, but it is subtle at the stage of first jh?na. Then in the first jh?na and the second jh?na access it is gross and in the second jh?na it is subtle and so on. Grossness and subtlety are here compared with jh?na and neighborhood of jh?na and next jh?na. So in the beginning it is gross. When you reach the neighborhood concentration, it is subtle. Then at the neighborhood concentration it is gross, and at the first jh?na it is subtle. Then at  the first jh?na it is gross and it is subtle at the neighborhood of second jh?na. Then it is subtler in the second jh?na and so on. Subtleness is described with the development of meditation and concentration.
   There are two pinions. The first one is the opinion of the D?gha and Sa?yutta reciters. The second one is the opinion of the Majjhima reciters. There is just a little difference. You know there are Nik?ya or Collections - Collection of Long Suttas, Collection of Medium Suttas, Collection of Miscellaneous or Kindred Suttas. There were monks who made special study of one Collection. They may have some opinions that may be different from those who specialize in another Collection. So there is difference between these teachers or these reciters. So D?gha and Sa?yutta reciters think this way and Majjhima reciters think the other way. This was in the case of Samatha meditation.
   ：But in the case of insight, the bodily formation occurring at the time of not discerning is gross, and in discerning the primary elements it is [by comparison] subtle;； and so on. This paragraph describes the development in vipassan? meditation. It is gross in the preceding states and subtle in the succeeding states.
   Then there is a long quotation from the Pa?isambhid?magga. We have come to the end of the first four methods. Do you remember the first four methods? What is the first one? You know when you breathe in long that you breathe in long. You know when you breathe out long that you breathe out long. There are long breaths and short breaths. Then what? Making clear the whole breath body. And then? Tranquilizing the breath body. These four methods pertain to samatha samatha meditation. They will be explained later.
   The other groups of four have to do with jh?nas and also with the other foundations of mindfulness. They will be explained later.
Student: The other three are still samatha meditation?
Teacher: They can be samatha and they can be vipassan? depending on how you practice. You practice on the breath and you get jh?na. Then you dwell on happiness or p?ti there. If you observe p?ti as impermanent, then you practice vipassan?. It will be described later.
   For the bodily formations meaning breathing in and breathing out, please see paragraph 181. There the text from the Pa?isambhid?magga is quoted. In the text ：I shall breathe in.. shall breathe out tranquilizing the bodily formations? What are the bodily formations? Long in-breaths..out-breaths [experiencing the whole body] belong to the body; these things being bound up with the body are bodily formations.； This is the explanation. They are called ．bodily formations・ because they are bound up with the body. They belong to the body. Without a body they cannot arise. So ．bodily formations・ mean in-breaths and out-breaths.
   Did you read the footnotes? Some of them are difficult to understand. I cannot go through them in detail. But in footnote 47 it says ：What is meant is this: the contemplation of the body as an in-breath-and-out-breath body； and so on. It is very difficult to understand that translation. I made a new translation. I think it is a little better.  
                  S?dhu!           S?dhu!           S?dhu!
We offer this transcription of a Dhamma class with Venerable U S?l?nanda with the hope that it will be beneficial for your understanding of the Buddha・s teachings. This transcription has not been edited. It is the record of spontaneous exchanges between the teacher and students. Therefore it is possible that there are some errors. We are certain that such errors are infrequent and minimal. Say?daw is a meticulous and careful teacher and offers these teachings in this manner out of compassion for people interested in the serious study and practice of meditation and Buddhism.  



                                                 (Tape 19 / 186 -230)

   Now we come to the real practice of breathing meditation. Beginning with paragraph 186 we have the method of development. Out of 16 methods 4 methods have been described in detail with regard to the Texts. Now come the explanations for real development.
   ：The first tetrad is set forth as a meditation subject for a beginner (That is a beginner in samatha meditation.); but the other three tetrads are [respectively] set forth, as the contemplation of feeling, of [the manner of] consciousness, and of mental objects, for one who has already attained jh?na in this tetrad.； So there are four sets of four methods each. The first set is for beginners in the practice of mindfulness of breathing meditation as a tranquillity meditation or serenity meditation. The other three are concerned with contemplation on feeling, contemplation on consciousness, and contemplation on mental objects. You know there are four foundations of mindfulness -contemplation on the body, contemplation on feeling, contemplation on consciousness, and contemplation on mental objects or I would prefer to call them ．dhamma objects・.
Student: Sometimes we talk about mind and objects of mind. Would ．objects of mind・ be dhamma objects?
Teacher: I think that also is not so good, not correct because everything is the object of mind. Sight is object of mind. Sound is object of mind. Sight, sound, smell, taste and touch are not called ．dhamma objects・.
   ：If a clansman who is a beginner wants to develop this meditation subject, and through insight based on the fourth jh?na produced in breathing, to reach Arahantship together with the discrimination (That means special achievements like psychic powers, reading other peoples・ minds and so on.), he should first do all the work connected with the purification of virtue, etc., (That means before practicing meditation one must purify one・s virtue, one・s moral conduct as described in the first chapter.), in the way already described, after which he should learn the meditation subject in five stages from a teacher of the kind already described.； He should go to a teacher and learn the meditation subject. 
   ：Herein, the five stages: learning, questioning, establishing, absorption, characteristic.； Although they are called ．stages・, maybe they are not real stages. Perhaps points or five-membered-learning is better.
   ： ．Learning・ is learning the meditation subject. ．Questioning・ is questioning about the meditation subject. ．Establishing・ is establishing the meditation subject.； Here ．establishing・ really means the appearance of signs after you have practiced this meditation for some time. We will come to the appearance of signs later. Before practicing one must learn what kind of signs can appear. 
   ： ．Absorption・ is the absorption of the meditation subject.； That means getting jh?na through this meditation. Sometimes the word ．appan?・ in P??i means something like finishing something or culminating something. The same word is used for jh?na and also attainment. In the Visuddhi Magga sometimes appan? is used in the sense of culmination.
Student: Appan? come s from the root ．pa???・?
Teacher: This word is derived from the word ．ar・. Then a suffix is put between the root and the suffix. There are two kinds of suffixes. There is ．ar・ and there is ．na・. And then there is a suffix which has a causal meaning, that is having someone make something. That suffix is put between the root and the verbal suffix. In Sanskrit it becomes ．arpa?a・. ．R・ is changed to ．P・ in P??i and so we have the word ．appan?・.That is sending to the finish or bringing to the finish - appan?. So the word can mean reaching the expected stage of jh?na. So ： ．absorption・ is the absorption of the meditation subject； means getting to the end of meditation, the attainment of jh?na. This meditation is described as a serenity meditation, the objective of which is the attainment of jh?na.
   ： ．Characteristic・ is the characteristic of the meditation subject; what is meant is that it is the ascertaining of the meditation subject・s individual essence thus ．This meditation subject has such a characteristic・. Learning the meditation subject in the five stages in this way, he neither tires himself nor worries the teacher.；
   ：So in giving this meditation subject consisting in mindfulness of breathing attention he can live either with the teacher or elsewhere in an abode of the kind already described.； So he may live with the teacher in the same place in the same monastery or he may live away from his teacher. 
   ：Learning the meditation subject in the five stages thus, getting a little expounded at a time and taking a long time over reciting it, he should sever the minor impediments. After finishing the work connected with the meal and getting rid of any dizziness due to the meal he should seat himself comfortably.； That is why in Myanmar most monks take rest after the meal just before noon. They take rest for about an hour, especially the older monks. That is to get rid of dizziness after the meal. When the stomach is full, you feel sleepy. To get rid of sleepiness you rest for awhile. After resting awhile practice is resumed.
   ：Then, making sure he is not confused about even a single word of what he has learned from the teacher, he should cheer his mind by recollecting the special qualities of the Three Jewels.； That is just preparing to go to the real practice of mindfulness of breathing.
   Then there are seven stages described here in the practice of mindfulness of breathing meditation. At first glance we might expect that these stages are practiced one after the other, but that is not so.  We will find out about that later. There may be a little confusion here.
   The first one is counting. When we first practice breathing meditation, the first thing we do is to count. When you do counting, you should not stop short of five or go beyond ten, or make any break in the series. Counting should be at least five and at most ten. There should be no break in the series.
   ：By stopping short of five his thoughts get excited in the cramped space, like a herd of cattle shut in a cramped pen.； It is too little if you say ：in one, out one, in two, out two； and again ：in one, out one, in two, out two；.
   ：By going beyond ten his thoughts take the number [rather than the breaths] for their support.； That means you are concerned about numbers - in one, out one..in one hundred, out one hundred. Numbers become the object of meditation rather than the breaths. 
   ：By making a break in the series he wonders if the meditation subject has reached completion or not.； ．By making a break in the series・ the Sub-Commentary explained that it is counting one, three, five, seven and so on. It may be like counting in one, out one and then you do not count the second pair. So in three, out three and then you let go of the next pair. Then you count in five, out five and so on. That is making a break in the series. So if you make a break in the series, you will wonder if the meditation has reached completion or not.
   One teacher of old in Myanmar explained it in another way. You count for some time and then you give up counting for some time. Then you pick it up again. Then you give it up again and so on. He said that was what is meant by making a break in the series. You may count in one, out one, in two, out two, in three, out three, in four, out four, in five, out five. Then you stop counting. Then again you begin counting in one, out one, in two, out two and so on. That will make you confused about the series of counting.
   So counting should not be below five nor above ten and there should be no break in the middle. ：So he should do his counting without those faults.；
   ：When counting, he should at first do it slowly, [that is late].； I don・t know where he got ．that is late・. It is put in the square brackets so it is supposed to be from the Sub-Commentary. Maybe it is Venerable ???amoli・s addition.
Student: Could it mean slowly or late in the sense that you are behind the count or you are slightly anticipating the count? Sometimes people do that, getting into the counting rather than the breath.
Teacher: I think that just ．slowly・ makes sense here, rather than the word ．late・ because here is shown a grain measurer・s counting. When a grain measurer having filled his measure says ：one； and empties it and then refills it, he goes on saying ：one, one, one；. And there may be some rubbish or something and he has to pick it up and throw it away, and while so doing, he may be saying ：one, one； until he reaches the second one. The same is true for two and so on. He may have to do something and he may be saying ：two, two, two； until he comes to the third. 
   ：So taking the in-breath or the out-breath, whichever appears [most plainly], he should begin with ．one,one・ and count up to ．ten,ten・, noting each as it occurs.； So the counting should be done: in one, out one, in two, out two, in three, out three and so on.
   ：As he does his counting in this way the in-breaths and out-breaths become evident to him as they enter in and issue out.； When they go in and come out, they become evident. They become clearer.
   ：Then he can leave off counting slowly, like a grain measurer, and he can count quickly, as a cowherd does. For a skilled cowherd takes pebbles his pocket and goes to the cow pen in the morning, whip in hand； and so on. What do you think of the counting of the cowherd here? I think that in the beginning the breath only seems to be one. You say ：in, out, in, out.； There seems to be only one breath. But when you have practiced for some time, one breath may appear to you as a series of short breaths. That is because one breath is a combination of small breaths. There are many breaths in what is formerly known as one breath. In one in-breath you may count one, two, three, four, five or something like that. I think that is what is meant here. Otherwise the simile of the cowherd counting cows that go out of the pen at the gate in groups, two at a time, three at a time - he may say three - but breathing in and breathing out does not come in and go out in exactly the same way as the cows. What is meant here I think is that formerly it seemed one breath, but now it appears to you as many breaths. So you count in one, two, three, four, five and going out one, two, three, four, five.
   ：So he counts quickly ．three,four,five・ and so up to ten. In this way the in-breaths, and out-breaths, which has already become evident to him while he counted them in the former way, now keep moving along quickly.； ．In the former way・ is explained in the Sub-Commentary as ．in the quick way・, but that is not correct. In another Commentary it is explained that ．in the former way・ means in the slow way. So ．in the former way・ means in the slow way, counting like a grain measurer does.
   ：Then knowing that they keep moving along quickly, not apprehending them either inside or outside [the body], but apprehending them just as they reach the [nostril] door,； - that is important.You do not go into the body or outside the body with the breaths, but apprehend them just as they reach the nostril door.

   ：He can do his counting quickly: ．one,two, three, four, five; one, two, three, four, five, six..seven;..eight..nine;..ten・.； Here also one may think it means that you count one to five, then one to six, then one to seven, but I do not think that is the case here. You may count one breath as one, two, three, four, five; or one, two, three, four, five, six; or one, two, three, four, five, six, seven; or as many as you can be aware of.
   ：For as long as the meditation subject is connected with counting, it is with the help of that very counting that the mind becomes unified.； So counting is just to keep your mind on the breath and to make it one-pointed or unified - ： just as a boat in a swift current is steadied with the help of a rudder (or with the help of a pole).；
   ：When he counts quickly, the meditation subject becomes apparent to him as an uninterrupted process.； At this stage the meditation has not reached the jh?na stage. Before reaching the jh?na stage there are interruptions. Interruptions are unavoidable. In Abhidhamma we learn that one thought process is followed by some moments of life-continuum (bhava~ga). Then there is another thought process. So thought processes arise and disappear in quick succession, but they are buffered by the arisings of bhava~ga or life continuum. So it cannot be called ．uninterrupted・. It can be uninterrupted only during the period of jh?na attainment. So it should say that it appears to him as though it were an uninterrupted process. It is very close to the uninterrupted stage.
   ：Then, knowing that it is proceeding uninterruptedly, he can count quickly in the way just described, not discerning the wind either inside or outside [the body]. For by  bringing his consciousness inside along with the incoming breath it seems as if it were buffeted by the wind inside or filled with fat.・ That means his appears to be soiling or something like that.
   ：By taking his consciousness outside along with the outgoing breath it gets distracted by the multiplicity of objects outside.； That is why we have to keep the mind at the entrance of the nostrils and not let it go into the body or outside the body.
   ：However, his development is successful when he fixes his mindfulness on the place touched [ by the breaths] (That means the tip of the nose or the upper lip.). That is why it was said above ．He can count quickly in the way just described, not discerning the wind either inside or outside・.； Strictly speaking in-breath and out-breath are said to be caused by mind. In-breath and out-breath are the air element. The air element is caused by kamma, caused by citta (mind), caused by climate (heat or cold), and caused by food.The breath is said to be caused by mind. It is mind-generated. Mind-generated material properties can only be found, only exist inside the body and not outside. Here is the breath. When you exhale, you may feel that the air goes out of the nose outside the body. As soon as it reaches outside the body, it becomes generated by climate and not generated by mind. In order to watch breathing in and breathing out closely our mind has to be here at the tip of the nose or at the entrance of the nostril where they are really mind-generated. After the out-breath leaves the tip of the nose, then it becomes generated by climate or temperature. That is why the attention has to be at the tip of the nose.
   ：But how long is he to go on counting?； Let us say  a monk is practicing counting - in one, out one, in two, out two and so on. ：Until, without counting mindfulness remains settled on the in-breaths and out-breaths as its object.； So he is to count until he can concentrate on breathing only without counting.
   ：For counting is simply a device for settling mindfulness on the in-breaths and out-breaths as object by cutting off the external dissipation of applied thoughts.； That is vitakka. We call it ．initial application・. Initial application or applied thought has the tendency to take mind out. In order to cut the distractions by applied thought one has to keep the mind on the breath, on the object. This is the first stage. In the first stage you do counting. You do this counting until you can concentrate fully on the breaths without counting. It may take days, weeks, or maybe months.
   Now the second one. It is called ．connection・, but I think ．connection・ is not so accurate. It is following. The P??i word means following.  That is also a little misleading because ．following・ does not mean to follow the breath into the body or outside the body, but just to be mindful of the breath. Still it is called ．following・ in P??i.
   ：Connection (anugamana) is the uninterrupted following of the in-breaths and out-breaths with mindfulness after counting has been given up.； So when you can be on the breaths without counting, you give up counting. At that moment you begin the second stage, connection or following.
   ：And that is not following after the beginning, the middle and the end.； It is just repeatedly keeping your attention or your mindfulness on the breaths at the entrance of the nostrils.
   ：The navel is the beginning of the wind issuing out, the heart is the middle, and the nose-tip is its end.； The beginning, the middle and the end of the out-breath and in-breath are described here. For the out-breath the navel is the beginning, the heart is the middle, and the tip of the nose is the end. For the in-breath the tip of the nose is the beginning, the heart is its middle, and the navel is its end.
   ：And if he follows after that, his mind is distracted by disquiet and perturbation, according as it is said.； This is a quotation from the Pa?isambhid?magga. This quotation is important because with the help of this quotation we decide which is meant by ass?sa and pass?sa in P??i. Last week we found that the P?li words ．ass?sa・ and ．pass?sa・ are interpreted differently by different Commentators.
   Here is the quotation from that book by the Venerable S?riputta. It is as authorative as the words of the Buddha. "When he goes in with mindfulness after the beginning, middle and end of the in-breath, his mind being distracted internally； - this word ．internally・ shows that the word used here means in-breath and not out-breath. So it is correctly translated here. There is no problem here. But if you read the P??i, then you may be doubtful as to whether the word ．ass?sa・ means the in-breath or the out-breath. When you read this passage, you come to the conclusion that ．ass?sa・ must mean in-breath. It says after the beginning, middle and end of let us say ．A・, his mind being distracted internally - when you say the word ．internally・, the ．A・ must mean in-breath. It cannot mean out-breath. This is the quotation.
   Now it says 3-4. Actually it is not with 3-4. Here comes the overlapping or combination of two or three stages at the same moment. ：So when he gives attention to it by connection, he should do so not by the beginning, middle and end (That means not following after the beginning, middle and end) but rather by touching and fixing.；
   ：There is no attention to be given to it by touching separate from fixing as there is by counting separate from connection.； So when we do counting and connection, there are two separate (modes) of attention - attention to counting and attention to the breath. But with regard to touching and fixing there are no separate (modes) of attention apart from counting and from connection.
   ：But when he is counting the breaths in the place touched by each, he is giving attention to them by counting and touching.； When you are counting, you are doing two stages at the same time - counting and touching. ．Touching・ here means keeping your mind at the place where the breath touches, where you feel the breath.
   ：When he has given up counting and is connecting them by means of absorption, then he is said to be giving his attention to them by connection, touching and fixing.；So you give up counting and are just mindful of the breaths as they come and go. At that moment there can be connection and touching. When you reach the stage of neighborhood concentration and jh?na concentration, then you are doing three at the same time - connection, touching and fixing. So these two stages are not to be separated from counting and connection.
   ：And the meaning of this may be understood through the simile of the man who cannot walk and the gate-keeper given in the Commentaries, and through the simile of the saw given in the Pa?isambhid?.；
   ：Here is the simile of the man who cannot walk: just as a man unable to walk, who is rocking a swing for the amusement of his children and their mother, sits at the foot of the swing post and sees both ends and the middle of the swing plank successively coming and going yet does not move from his place in order to see both ends and the middle, so too, when a bhikkhu places himself with mindfulness, as it were, at the foot of the post for anchoring [mindfulness] and rocks the swing of the in-breaths and out-breaths; he sits down with mindfulness on the sign at that same place, and follows with mindfulness the beginning, middle and end of the in-breaths and out-breaths at the place touched by them as they come and go; keeping his mind fixed there, he then sees them without moving from his place in order to see them. This is the simile of the man who cannot walk.； He is aware of the beginning, middle and end of the in-breaths and out-breaths, but his attention is on the breaths and not the beginning, middle and end. He cannot help but be aware of the beginning, middle and end, but he does not pay attention to them.
   The next simile is the same, the gate-keeper. The gate-keeper is only interested in people who are at the gate and not those who have gone inside the city or who have gone outside the city. He is interested only in those people who are at the gate. ：So too, the incoming breaths that have gone inside and the outgoing breaths that have gone outside are not this bhikkhu・s concern, but they are his concern each time they arrive at the [nostril] gate itself.； So only when they reach the nostril gate, do they become the object of his mindfulness. This is the simile of the gate-keeper.
   Next is the simile of the saw. It is more evident in this simile that he pays attention to or keeps his attention at the entrance of the nostrils. He pays attention to the breaths only when they reach that place, that entrance, not going with the breath inside the body or outside the body.
   In paragraph 202 near the beginning of the second paragraph ： The man・s mindfulness is established by the saw・s teeth where they touch the tree trunk without his giving attention to the saw・s teeth as they approach and recede.； Actually that means the saw・s teeth that have come and have gone. The saw・s teeth are not the point where they touch the log. They have gone this way or that way. That is what is meant. It is not ．as they approach and recede・, but it is the saw・s teeth that are not at the point of touching the log or those that have gone the other way. ：Though they are not unknown to him as they do so; and he manifests effort, carries out a task and achieves an effect.；
   ：So too the bhikkhu sits, having established mindfulness at the nose tip or on the upper lip, without giving attention to the in-breaths and out-breaths that have come and gone.； It is not ．as they approach and recede・ because he must pay attention as they approach and recede, as they come and go. But he is not to pay attention to those that have gone into the body or to those that have gone out of the body. ：Though they are not unknown to him as they do so； - that is he is not unaware of them as they do so.
   ：And he manifests effort, carries out a task and achieves an effect.； Then there is an explanation of effort and so on. They are used in a different sense here. ： ．Effort・: what is effort? The body and mind of one who is energetic becomes wieldy - this is effort.； The mind and body becoming wieldy is said to be effort here.
   ：What is he task? Imperfections come to be abandoned in one who is energetic, and his applied thoughts are stilled - this is the task. What is the effect? Fetters come to be abandoned in one who is energetic, and his inherent tendencies come to be done away with - this is the effect.；
   ：So these three things are not the object of a single consciousness, and they are nevertheless not unknown, and the mind does not become distracted, and he manifests effort, carries out a task, and achieves an effect.； This is the simile of the saw.
   When we practice vipassan? (mindfulness) meditation we use this method also. Even when you practice vipassan?, you try to keep the mind at the entrance of the nostrils and try to be mindful of the breaths coming in and going out.
   ：After someone has given his attention to counting, then just as when a body that is disturbed sits down on a bed or chair； and so on - at the beginning the body is not settled, is not cooled down. You move a lot. There is squeaking of the bed or chair and so on. But when your mind gets stilled, then your body also gets stilled and your breath becomes subtle. ：Both the body and the mind become light. The physical body is as though it were ready to leap up into the air.； You feel lightness in the body and mind.
   ：When his gross in-breaths and out-breaths have ceased, his consciousness occurs with the sign of the subtle in-breaths and out-breaths as its object.； The breaths become subtle. So they become the object of his meditation. ：And when that has ceased, it goes on occurring with the successively subtler signs as its object.； The breaths become more and more subtle as he makes progress in the mindfulness of breathing meditation.
   The mindfulness of breathing meditation is different from the other objects of meditation. For the other objects of meditation, they become clearer at each higher stage. Let us suppose you practice kasi?a meditation. The sign of the kasi?a becomes clearer and clearer as you make progress. But the breath becomes less clear when you make progress. It becomes subtle and it is more difficult to see. Paragraph 208 ：It becomes more subtle for him at each higher stage, and it even comes to the point at which it is no longer manifest.； The breath is there, but it is so subtle that you are not aware of the breath. You may even think that you have stopped breathing all together or that you may have died.
   ：However, when it becomes unmanifest in this way, the bhikkhu should not get up from his seat, shake out his leather mat, and go away.； He must not go away saying, ：I have lost my object of meditation.；
   ：What should be done? He should not get up with the idea ．Shall I ask the teacher?・ (That means I will ask the teacher.) or ．Is my meditation subject lost?・; for by going away, and so disturbing his posture, the meditation subject has to be started anew.； By changing postures the meditation subject has to be started anew. That is why we try to instruct meditators to keep still as much as they can, not to make many movements or not to make movements too often. When you make movements, you have to be mindful of these movements. Even if it can be done with mindfulness, it is still a distraction from the main object. It is better to keep still as much as and as long as you can.
   ：So he should go on sitting as he was and [temporarily] substitute the place.； That means he should not give up, but go on sitting keeping his mind at the place. Now at this moment the breath has become so subtle that he is not aware of the breath. Let us say that he has lost the breath. But he must catch the breath at the place where he formerly caught the breaths. Instead of leaving the place, you stay stuck to the place and let the breaths become clear again. That is what is meant here.
   ：These are the means for doing it.； When you think you have lost the breaths there are some things to do. ： ．Where do these in-breaths and out-breaths exist? Where do they not? In whom do they exist? In whom not?・ Then, as he considers thus, he finds that they do not exist in one inside the mother・s womb.； This is what is believed in those days. There are seven kinds of people that do not breathe - the child in the mother・s womb, those drowned in water (those who have drowned), or likewise in unconscious beings (those who have become unconscious), or it can mean those who are reborn as mindless beings (It is explained in both ways in the Sub-Commentary.), in the dead (Dead people don・t breathe.), or in those who attain to fourth jh?na (When a person attains the fourth jh?na, there is no breathing.) , or in those born into a fine material or immaterial existence (That is those reborn as brahmas. Brahmas do not breathe.) , or to those attained to cessation of perception and feeling. There is an attainment called ．attainment of cessation・. Actually it is cessation of mind. During that attainment the mental activities are temporarily stopped or they are suspended as long the person wishes. It may be one day, two days, or at most seven days. So there are these seven kinds of beings who have no breath. 
   So he should review this ：So he should apostrophize himself thus: ．You with all your wisdom are certainly not inside a mother・s womb or drowned in water.； You are not any one of those seven persons. There must be breath. So you are not without breath. ：Those in-breaths and out-breaths are actually existent in you, only you are not able to discern them because your understanding is dull.； Actually your understanding is sharp at that time, but since you cannot be aware of the breath, your wisdom or pa??? is said to be dull at that moment.
   ：Then, fixing his mind on the place normally touched [by the breaths], he should proceed to give his attention to that.； When you have lost the breath, you go to the same place where you have caught it before and try to wait for it there.
   ：These in-breaths and out-breaths occur striking the tip of the nose in a long-nosed man.； So if you have a long nose, they strike at the tip of the nose. If you have a short nose, the breath strikes at the upper lip of a short-nosed man.
   ：So he should fix the sign thus: ．This is the place where they strike・. This was why the Blessed One said: ．Bhikkhus, I do not say of one who is forgetful, who is not fully aware, [that he practices] development of mindfulness of breathing・.； That means if you are forgetful, if you do not have good mindfulness, you cannot practice mindfulness of breathing meditation. Your understanding has to be sharp. Here the Buddha said if you are forgetful, if you are not fully aware, you cannot practice mindfulness meditation, mindfulness of breathing meditation.
   But the Commentator said: ：Although any meditation subject, no matter what, is successful only in one who is mindful and fully aware, yet any meditation subject other than this one gets more evident as he goes on giving it his attention. But this mindfulness of breathing is difficult, difficult to develop, a field in which only the minds of Buddhas, Pacceka Buddhas and Buddhas・ sons are at home. It is no trivial matter, nor can it be cultivated by trivial persons. In proportion as continued attention is given to it, it becomes more peaceful and subtle. So strong mindfulness and understanding are necessary here.； Stronger mindfulness and understanding are needed in the practice of mindfulness of breathing meditation than in the practice of other kinds of meditation.
   ：Just as when doing needlework on a piece of fine cloth a fine needle is needed, and a still finer instrument for boring the needle・s eye, so too, when developing this meditation subject, which resembles fine cloth, both mindfulness, which is the counterpart of the needle, and the understanding associated with it, which is the counterpart of the instrument for boring the needle・s eye, need to be strong. A bhikkhu must have the necessary mindfulness and understanding and must look for the in-breaths and out-breaths nowhere else than the place normally touched by them.； By just keeping the mind at the place where they touched before, he waits for the breathing to become evident again. Then there is a simile of a ploughman. Let us skip that.
   Paragraph 214 ：When he does so in this way, the sign soon appears to him.； He perseveres in keeping the mind at the tip of the nose, and so the breathing becomes evident to him again. Then he dwells on that sign or that breathing continuously, and so soon appears the sign of different kinds. ：But it is not the same for all.； The sign does not appear in the same way for all. For one person one kind of sign will appear and for the other person another sign will appear. There is not one sign, but many forms of the sign.
   ：But it is not the same for all; on the contrary, some say that when it appears it does so to certain people producing a light touch like cotton or silk-cotton or a draught. But this is the exposition given in the commentaries: it appears to some like a star or a cluster of gems or a cluster of pearls, to others with a rough touch like that of silk-cotton seeds or a peg made of heartwood.； That is what some meditators feel. They feel like something is put in the nostrils. It may even feel difficult to breathe. ：To others (it seems) like a long braid string or a wreath of flowers or a puff of smoke, to others like a stretched-out cobweb or a film of cloud or a lotus flower or a chariot wheel or the moon・s disk or the sun・s disk.； Any kind of sign can appear to a person. When my father practiced this meditation, he said the sign was like a sheet of silver. Any one of those mentioned here or those not mentioned here may appear to a meditator. Anything can appear as the sign of this meditation.
   ：In fact this resembles an occasion when a number of bhikkhus are sitting together reciting a Suttanta. When a bhikkhu asks ．What does this Sutta appear like to you?・, one says ．It appears to me like a great mountain torrent・, another ．To me it is like a line of forest trees・.； and so on. Depending on different persons there can be multiplicity or great variety of these signs.
   ：Similarly this single meditation subject appears differently because of difference in perception. It is born of perception, its source is perception, it is produced by perception. Therefore it should be understood that when it appears differently it is because of difference in perception.； People have different outlooks or different notions, so the sign appears differently to different people.
   ：And here, the consciousness that has in-breath as its object is one, the consciousness that has out-breath as its object is another, and the consciousness that has the sign as its object is another.； This you know from Abhidhamma. Consciousness can only take one object at a time. Consciousness that takes in-breath as object is one. And then consciousness that takes the out-breath is another. So they are different.
   ：And the consciousness that has the sign as its object is another. For the meditation subject reaches neither absorption nor even access in one who has not got these three things [clear] (who does not see clearly the in-breath, the out-breath, and the sign). But it reaches access and also absorption in one who has got these three things [clear].；
   When the sign appears in this way, what must the meditator do? ：The bhikkhu should go to the teacher and tell him ．Venerable sir, such and such has appeared to me・. But [say the D?gha Reciters] the teacher should say neither ．This is the sign・ nor ．This is not the sign・; after saying ．It happens like this, friend・.； The teacher should just say that it happens like this. The teacher should not say that this is the sign or that this is not the sign. That is what the D?gha Reciters think.
   ：He should tell him ．Go on giving it attention again and again・; for if he were told ：It is the sign・, he might [become complacent and] stop short at that.； That means the sign is difficult to get. If the teacher says that he has the sign, the student might think ：Oh, I・ve got what s difficult to get and so I may slow down a little. I can practice any time I like.； He may think something like that. ：And if he were told ．It is not the sign・, he might get discouraged and give up; so he should encourage him to keep giving it his attention without saying either. So the D?gha Reciters say, firstly.；
   ．D?gha reciters・ means the reciters of the Long Discourses. You know there are Collections of Long Discourses, Middle Length Discourses, Kindred Discourses and The Gradual Sayings. There are monks who do special study of the Long Discourses. Other monks make special study of the Middle Length Discourses and so on. The D?gha Reciters say like this.
   ：But the Majjhima Reciters (those who make special study of The Middle Length Sayings) say that he should be told ．This is the sign, friend. Well done. Keep giving attention to it again and again・.； They thought there is no reason for a meditator to be discouraged or to be complacent when he knows that he has got the sign. He practices meditation just to attain to the jh?na stage and later on for the attainment of enlightenment. When the teacher says ：It is the sign；, then he must be encouraged. So it is good according to the Majjhima Reciters to tell the student that it is the sign.
Student: And it is also Venerable Buddhaghosa・s opinion because it is the second one?
Teacher: That・s right. You remembered. That・s very good.
   ：Then he should fix his mind on the same sign; and so from now on, his development proceeds by way of fixing.； We come now to the fourth stage, fixing.
   ：So as soon as the sign appears, his hindrances are suppressed, his defilements subside, his mindfulness is established, and his consciousness is concentrated in access concentration.； Then after access concentration comes jh?na concentration.
   ：Then he should not give attention to the sign as to its color, or review it as to its [specific] characteristic.； This is because if he gives attention to its color, it will become a color meditation and not breathing meditation. If he reviews it as to its characteristic, it will become another kind of meditation rather than mindfulness of breathing meditation. He should not pay attention to its color or its characteristic.
   ：He should guard it as carefully as a king・s chief queen guards the child in her womb due to become a Wheel-turning Monarch.； That means a Universal Monarch. He should guard it.
   ：Then guarding it thus, he should make it grow and improve with repeated attention.； He should pay attention to it, dwell on it for a long time.
   ：And he should practice the tenfold skill in absorption (Ch.4,42) and bring about evenness of energy.； That means evenness or balance of energy and concentration.
   ：As he strives thus, fourfold and fivefold jh?na is achieved by him on that same sign in the same way as described under the earth kasi?a.； So jh?na arises in him. Then from first jh?na he would go to second, third, fourth and fifth jh?nas. During the moments of jh?na the mind is very fixed, very still. This is the fourth stage, fixing.
   After fixing comes what? After fixing comes observing. What is observing? Observing is insight is what is explained there. So now he will change to vipassan? meditation. Until this point he practiced mindfulness of breathing meditation as a samatha meditation. He got to the jh?na stage. After that it will become vipassana? meditation.
   ：However, when a bhikkhu has achieved the fourfold and fivefold jh?na and wants to reach purity by developing the meditation subject through observing and through turning away, he should make that jh?na familiar by attaining mastery in it in the five ways and then embark upon insight by defining mentality-materiality. How?；
   Since he has jh?na, he makes the jh?na the basis for his vipassan? meditation. He enters into jh?na. Then after emerging from jh?na, he concentrates on the jh?na. First he embarks on insight by defining mentality and materiality - defining this is mind, this is matter.
   ：On emerging from the attainment, he sees that the in-breaths and out-breaths have the physical body and the mind as their origin (because they are caused by mind); and that just as, when a blacksmith・s bellows are being blown, the wind moves owing to the bag and to the man・s appropriate effort, so too, in-breaths and out-breaths are due to the body and the mind.；
   ：Next, he defines the in-breaths and out-breaths and the body as ．materiality・, and the consciousness and the states associated with the consciousness as the ．immaterial・ [mind].； Do you know why it is stated here, why it is given here? Because real vipassan? begins with discerning mind and matter clearly. One must be able to see, not just guess, to see clearly mind and matter through meditation. First we need concentration. Then after concentration of mind comes the discerning of mind and matter. This is the actual beginning of vipassan? meditation.
   ：Having defined mentality-materiality in this way, he seeks its condition.； From the stage of discerning mentality and materiality he progresses to the stage of seeing their conditions, or seeing that they are conditioned, seeing their causes.
  ：With search he finds it and so overcomes his doubts about the way of mentality-materiality・s occurrence in the three divisions of time.； That means the breath and the body are materiality, and mindfulness and others are mentality. They are not uncaused or they are not unconditioned. The breath is conditioned by mind. The consciousness and mental factors are conditioned by each other and are also conditioned by the material base and so on. The next stage is seeing the conditionality of things actually, seeing the conditions of mind and matter.
   ：His doubts being overcome, he attributes the three characteristics  [beginning with that of suffering to mentality and materiality], comprehending [them] by groups; he abandons the ten imperfections of insight beginning with illumination, which arise in the first stages of the Contemplation of Rise and Fall, and he defines as ．the path・ the knowledge of the way that is free from these imperfections.； This is a very brief description of the stages of vipassan? meditation. They will be treated in detail in succeeding chapter.
   After discerning conditions he discerns what? The three characteristics - impermanence, suffering and insubstantiality. So these three characteristics he comes to see.
   ：He reaches Contemplation of Dissolution by abandoning [attention to] arising.； At the early stage of seeing arising and falling the impediments come in, the impediments to the progress of vipassan? - seeing lights, feeling very happy and so on. When they arise, a yogi may think that he has attained enlightenment. If he thinks in this way, he will not make effort to reach higher stages. He must understand that these are not the way to enlightenment. They are just obstacles. He has to overcome these obstacles. When he has overcome these obstacles, he reaches the higher stages of discerning rising and falling. So there are two stages in the discernment of rising and falling, the lower stage and the higher stage. After reaching the lower stage the ten impediments occur in the yogi. After conquering these ten impediments he reaches the higher stage of discerning rise and fall.
   From there he reaches another stage where he sees only the falling, only the dissolution, only the disappearing of things. Only the dissolution of things appears to him clearly. That is the contemplation of dissolution.
   ：He reaches Contemplation of Dissolution by abandoning [attention to] arising. When all formations have appeared as terror owing to the contemplation of their incessant dissolution.； After that he sees them as dangerous, as dangers. He is not afraid of them; he does not fear them. Still he sees them as dangerous. It is different. Sometimes you are not afraid of something, but you recognize it as dangerous. Here a yogi does not get afraid of them. If he gets afraid of them, then he has akusala in him and not meditation. When he sees things just disappearing, disappearing, disappearing, he comes to see danger in disappearing. 
   After that he becomes dispassionate towards them. When you see something is dangerous, you are not attached to it. You want to get away from it. So he becomes dispassionate towards them. ：His greed for them fades away, and he is liberated from them.； ．Liberated from them・ means he has gotten rid of attachment, anger and delusion and has become enlightened.
   ：After he has [thus] reached the Four Noble Paths in due succession and has become established in the Fruition of Arahantship, he at last attains to the 19 kinds of Reviewing Knowledge.； After the attainment of each stage of enlightenment there is what we call ．reviewing・ - reviewing the Path, reviewing Fruit, reviewing Nibb?na, reviewing the mental defilements that have been eradicated and reviewing the mental defilements which remain. There are five kinds of reviewing after the first stage, second stage and third stage. But at the fourth stage, after becoming an Arahant, there are only four kinds of reviewing.There are no mental defilements remaining. For the Arahants there are only four kinds of reviewing - reviewing of Path, Fruit, Nibb?na and defilements eradicated. So all together we have 19 kinds of reviewing knowledge.
   ：And he becomes fit to receive the highest gifts from the world with its deities.； A  person first practices mindfulness of breathing meditation as samatha meditation and gets jh?na. Then making that jh?na the basis for vipassan? meditation, he practices vipassan? meditation and gradually reaches the stage of Arahant.
   ：At this point his development of concentration through mindfulness of breathing, beginning with counting and ending with looking back is completed.；
   In the stages ．observing・ means vipassan?. ．Turning away・ means attainment of Path or attainment of enlightenment. ．Looking back・ means reviewing. All eight stages are complete now. ：This is the commentary on the first tetrad in all aspects.；
   Do you remember the first four methods? Long, short, whole breath body and tranquilizing the breath. These are the four.
   ：Now since there is no separate method for developing the meditation subject in the case of the other tetrads, their meaning therefore needs only to be understood according to the word commentary.； There is no special method of practicing the other sets of four. This is because the other sets of four are to be practiced after a person reaches the jh?na stage by practicing the first four methods. There are no special for he other tetrads.
   In the second tetrad ：He trains thus ．I shall breathe in.. shall breathe out experiencing happiness・ (p?ti).； That means he clearly sees, or clearly experiences, or clearly knows p?ti.
   ：Herein, the happiness is experienced in two ways: (a) with the object (That means by way of the object), and (b) with (by way of) non-confusion.； I think ．with・ does not mean by way of. I think it is better to say ．by way of・.
   ：How is the happiness experienced with the object? He attains the jh?nas in which happiness is present. At the time when he has actually entered upon them the happiness is experienced with the object owing to the obtaining of jh?na, because of the experiencing of the object.； When a person obtains the first or second jh?na, what is the object of that jh?na? The sign, the counterpart sign. At the moment of jh?na the actual object is the counterpart sign and not happiness. But here it said he is experiencing, he is knowing happiness, he is knowing p?ti at that moment. So that means at the time of reaching jh?na happiness or p?ti is said to be known clearly by way of the object. That means because the object is clearly known at that time, because the object is known, p?ti is also known. It is not that p?ti becomes the object of jh?na. By way of the object itself we can say that p?ti is also known.
   Footnote 62 ： ．With the object・: under the heading of the object. The happiness included in the jh?na that has the object is experienced ．because of the experiencing of the object・. What is meant? Just as, when a man who is looking for a snake discovers its abode, the snake is, as it were, already discovered and caught, owing to the ease with which he will then be able to catch it with charms and spells.； He has not yet caught the snake, but it is as good as having caught it.
   ：So too, when the object, which is  the abode of happiness, is experienced, then the happiness itself is experienced too, owing to the ease with which it will be apprehended in its specific and general characteristics.； ．Specific characteristic・ means its characteristic which is not shared by other mental states. ．General characteristic・ means its characteristic of impermanence, suffering and no-soul nature. So when the object is clearly seen, p?ti is also said to be clearly seen. That is what is meant here.
   ：How with non-confusion? When, after entering upon and emerging from one of the two jh?nas accompanied by happiness, he comprehends with insight that happiness associated with the jh?na as liable to destruction and to fall, then at the actual time of the insight the happiness is experienced with (by way of) non-confusion owing to the penetration of its characteristics.； That is when he practices vipassan? meditation on it. First he enters into the first or second jh?na. He emerges from it. Then he takes the happiness of the jh?na factors as an object of meditation and contemplates on it as impermanent, suffering and soulless. At that moment he really clearly sees the happiness. ．Non-confusion・ means he sees it as it is - as impermanent, as suffering, as soulless and not otherwise.
   Then there is a quotation from the Pa?isambhid?magga. We can skip it.
   Paragraph 229 ：The remaining [three] clauses should be understood in the same way as to meaning; but there is this difference here. The experiencing of bliss (sukha) must be to be through three jh?nas.； Sukha is present in first jh?na, second jh?na and third jh?na. So here it says ：through three jh?nas and that of mental formations through four.； What is ．mental formation・ here? We don・t have to ask because it is explained. ：The mental formation consists of the two aggregates of feeling and perception.； Here ．mental formation・ means feeling and perception. So feeling and perception are called ．mental formation・ or ．citta sa~kh?ra・ because they arise only when consciousness arises. They depend upon consciousness for their arising. They are said to be conditioned by citta, by consciousness or mind. ．Mental formation・ really means mind-formed, or formed by, or conditioned by consciousness. Here ．conditioned by consciousness・ is made to mean feeling and perception. ．Experiencing the mental formation・ means experiencing feeling and perception.
   ：And in the case of the clause, experiencing bliss, it is said in the Pa?isambhid? in order to show the plane of insight here [as well]: ．Bliss, there are two kinds of bliss, bodily bliss and mental bliss・. Tranquilizing the mental formation: tranquilizing the gross mental formation; stopping it, is the meaning.； So there is experiencing bliss and tranquilizing formations. In the first jh?na, second jh?na, third jh?na there is sukha. During those jh?nas a person is said to experience bliss. ．Tranquilizing the gross mental formation・ means tranquilizing the gross feeling and perception.
   ：Here, moreover in the ．happiness・ clause feeling [which is actually being contemplated in this tetrad] is stated under the heading of ．happiness・ [which is a formation] but in the ．bliss・ clause feeling is stated in its own form.； The P??i words are ．p?tispatisamvedi・ and ．sukhapatisamvedi・. In the clause p?tipatisamvedi, that is experiencing happiness feeling is stated under the heading of happiness. Although it is says ．happiness・, we are to understand it to mean feeling. Do you know why he is saying this here? Because this second tetrad has to do with contemplation on feeling. Although it says ．experiencing happiness・, the real thing is clearly understanding or clearly knowing feeling. Feeling is described here under the heading of happiness (p?t?).
The real word that is used is ．happiness・ (p?ti), but what we have to understand is feeling.
   In the clause experiencing bliss it is stated in its own form. That means sukhapatisamvedi. Sukha belongs to feeling. So here feeling is stated directly. So we do not have to go round here. So ．experiencing bliss・ means experiencing the feeling. ．・Experiencing happiness・ (p?ti) also means experiencing feeling. Experiencing bliss (sukha) is stated in its own form, not under any other thing.
   ：In the two mental-formation clauses the feeling is that [necessarily] associated with perception because of the words ．perception・ and ．feeling・ belong to the mind, these things being bound up with the mind are mental formations.； The third clause, tranquilizing the mental formations - although ．mental formation・ means feeling and perception, here it is made to mean feeling accompanied by perception. Actually it is the same thing. It is feeling accompanied by or associated with perception. That is why this tetrad has to do with contemplation on feeling.
   The Commentator is explaining this to us because we may ask about the second  and clause where it is said that he is aware of p?ti which is not feeling, but it is included in the feeling contemplation. So he explained that although the word ．p?ti・ is mentioned, but we must understand feeling, not p?ti. The second tetrad has to do with the contemplation on feelings. This second tetrad can only be practiced after one gets jh?nas. In order to understand this you have to understand that the first jh?na, second jh?na are accompanied by p?ti and the third jh?na is accompanied by sukha. The fourth jh?na also is accompanied by sukha. The fifth jh?na is accompanied by upekkh?. This is the end of the second tetrad. The third tetrad and so on we will finish next week.

                              S?dhu!           S?dhu!             S?dhu!

We offer this transcription of a Dhamma class with Venerable U S?l?nanda with the hope that it will be beneficial for your understanding of the Buddha・s teachings. This transcription has not been edited. It is the record of spontaneous exchanges between the teacher and students. Therefore it is possible that there are some errors. We are certain that such errors are infrequent and minimal. Say?daw is a meticulous and careful teacher and offers these teachings in this manner out of compassion for people interested in the serious study and practice of meditation and Buddhism.

                                         (Tape 20 / Ps: 231 V 251)
                                                  

   Today we come to the third tetrad. The third tetrad has to do with consciousness. ：In the third tetrad the experience of the [manner of] consciousness must be understood through four jh?nas.； Here I do not know where he got the words ．manner of・. I don・t find them in the Sub-Commentary. We don・t need to say ．experiencing the manner of consciousness・. We may say ．experiencing consciousness・. That means clearly seeing consciousness. So I would leave out the words ．manner of・.
   The next is: ：Gladdening the consciousness: he trains thus, making the mind glad, instilling gladness into it, cheering it, rejoicing it, I shall breathe in, shall breathe out. Herein, there is gladdening in two ways, through concentration and through insight.； So through samatha and vipassan?.
   ：How through concentration? He attains the two jh?nas in which happiness (p?ti) is present.； The two jh?nas mean what? According to the fourfold method it means the first and second jh?nas. If it is according to the fivefold method, it is first, second and third jh?nas. Mostly the fourfold method is used in the book, so it says two jh?nas, the first and the second according to the fourfold method.
   ：At the time when he has actually entered upon them he inspires the mind with gladness, instills gladness into it, by means of the happiness associated with the jh?na.； When he is in the first jh?na or the second jh?na, there is p?ti arising together with jh?na. When there is p?ti or happiness, his mind is gladdened. He experiences that at the moment of jh?na attainment.
   ：How through insight? After entering upon and emerging from one of the two jh?nas accompanied by happiness he comprehends with insight and happiness associated with the jh?na as liable to destruction and to fall, thus at the actual time of insight he inspires the mind with gladness, instills gladness into it by making the happiness associated with jh?na the object.； The person who is practicing vipassan? here has obtained jh?na before. So he enters into jh?na first and emerges from the jh?na. Then he contemplates on the p?ti associated with jh?na, contemplates on p?ti as liable to destruction, liable to fall because if you practice vipassan?, you must see the impermanence, suffering and soulless nature of things. Therefore he contemplates on p?ti as liable to fall, liable to destruction.
Student: Bhante, is p?ti vedan? or not?
Teacher: P?ti is not vedan?.
Student: This is p?ti? 
Teacher: Yes, this is actual p?ti.
   ：It is of one progressing in this way that the words ．He trains thus: I shall breathe in..shall breathe out gladdening the consciousness・, are said.； In this method the meditator enters into jh?na first, emerges from the jh?na and contemplates here on p?ti as liable to destruction and so on. He inspires his mind, he gladdens his mind thus.
   ： ．Concentrating the consciousness・ means evenly placing the mind.； We have the P??i word ．sam?daha?・. ．Sama?・ means evenly. ．?dahanto・ means putting or placing. So the P??i word ．sam?daha?・ means evenly placing. It is a synonym for sam?dhi. Sam?dhi is that mental state which keeps the mind evenly on the object. The mind is collected, not scattered, not only the mind but the other concomitants as well. The mind and the other concomitants are collected and kept on the object without being distracted.  This is the function of sam?dhi.
   ：Evenly placing the mind, evenly putting it on its object by means of the first jh?na and so on； - since sam?dhi is mentioned, we take any jh?na. That is because there is sam?dhi in any jh?na. 
   The first jh?na has how many factors? Five factors. The fifth one is what? Ekaggat?.
That is one-pointedness of mind or unification of mind which is a synonym for sam?dhi. Sam?dhi in a very strong form is present in all jh?nas - first, second, third and fourth.
   ：Or alternatively when, having entered upon those jh?nas and emerged from them, he comprehends with insight the consciousness associated with the jh?na as liable to destruction and to fall.； Here he enters into jh?na, emerges from jh?na, and concentrates on jh?na consciousness.
   You know what jh?na is. Technically speaking ．jh?na・ means the collection of the five factors, or four factors, or three factors, or two factors. Jh?na consciousness is consciousness accompanied by jh?na factors. There are other concomitants arising together with the jh?na factors and with the jh?na consciousness. Here the meditator takes consciousness as the object of vipassan?. In the previous method he takes p?ti as the object of vipassan?. Here he takes consciousness as the object of vipassan?.
   ：At the actual time of insight momentary unification of the mind arises.； This is important, this momentary unification. In P??i it is called ．kha?ika sam?dhi・. I think you should be familiar with the P??i words ．kha?ika sam?dhi・. ．Kha?ika・ means lasting for a moment. ．Kha?a・ means a moment. ．Sam?dhi・ means sam?dhi. So kha?ika sam?dhi is momentary concentration, momentary unification of the mind. It is explained in the Sub-Commentary. The translation is given in the footnotes. What is needed in vipassan? meditation is this kha?ika sam?dhi, this momentary sam?dhi.
   There are two kinds of sam?dhi in samatha meditation. They are mentioned at the beginning, I think, of the third chapter. One is neighborhood or access sam?dhi. The second one is absorption sam?dhi. There are two kinds of sam?dhi, neighborhood sam?dhi and absorption sam?dhi. When you practice samatha meditation, first you get neighborhood concentration. From neighborhood concentration you progress to jh?na concentration.
   In vipassan? there can be no neighborhood concentration because neighborhood implies there is jh?na. Whose neighbor? It is the neighbor of jh?na. But in vipassan? there is no jh?na. So there can be no neighborhood or access concentration in vipassan?. Instead of neighborhood concentration there is this momentary concentration. This is as good as the neighborhood concentration. Concentration lasting for only a moment, that is the word meaning of momentary concentration.
   ：For that too, when it occurs uninterruptedly on its object in a single mode and is not overcome by opposition, fixes the mind immovably, as if in absorption.； The momentary concentration can keep the mind on the object and not let it be distracted. That is what we call ．momentary concentration・.
   When a person practices vipassan?, in the beginning he may have wandering of mind, going out here and there. He has to bring it back to the main object again and again. Then a time will come with practice when this wandering comes less frequently until it will not come at all. The mind will not be distracted at all. Or even when there is distraction the meditator will catch it right away. He will not be carried away by the wandering or stray thoughts for ten seconds, twenty seconds and so on. That is the time when the meditator is said to have gained the momentary concentration. That means the mind is on the main object for a long time. And even if there is wandering mind the meditator is able to catch it, is able to be mindful of it as soon as it goes out. Sometimes you will be able to stop it before it goes out. The moment it is about to go out, you are aware. So you can stop it before it goes out. Such a time is called the time that a person has reached momentary concentration. Momentary concentration is important in vipassan? meditation. It is the counterpart of neighborhood or access concentration in samatha meditation. With that concentration mind is concentrated. It arises through the penetration of the characteristics of impermanence and so on. The mind is on mind and matter and on their impermanent nature and others.
   The next one is liberating the consciousness, freeing the consciousness. ．Liberation・ here can mean different things with different jh?nas. Since it has to do with jh?nas, jh?nas are mentioned here. The first jh?na liberates the mind from what? The first jh?na liberates the mind from hindrances. That is because if there are hindrances in your mind, you cannot get the first jh?na. So first jh?na frees your mind from mental hindrances. The second jh?na frees your mind from what? Initial application (vitakka) and sustained application (vic?ra). And the third jh?na frees your mind from p?ti and so on.
   ：Or alternatively, when having entered upon those jh?nas and emerged from them, he comprehends with insight the consciousness associated with the jh?na as liable to destruction and to fall.； First he enters into jh?na and emerges from jh?na. Then he comprehends the consciousness associated with the jh?na as liable to destruction and so on. 
   ：Then at the actual time of insight he delivers, liberates, the mind from the perception of permanence by means of the contemplation of impermanence.； If he contemplates on impermanence, he liberates the mind from the conception of permanence. ：From the perception of pleasure by means of the contemplation of pain； - if he contemplates on dukkha, then he will be able to free his mind from the perception of sukha. ：From the perception of self by means of the contemplation of not self； - if he contemplates on not self, he will be able to get rid of the perception of self. ：From delight by means of the contemplation of dispassion； - so when you contemplate on dispassion, delight will be gotten rid of. ：From greed by means of contemplation of fading away； - ．fading away・ really means Magga. ：From arousing by means of the contemplation of cessation； - when you contemplate on cessation, you do not arouse anything, you do not cause anything to arise. ：From grasping by means of the contemplation of relinquishment； - when you contemplate relinquishment, then you abandon grasping. These are those liberated by different stages of vipassan? meditation. This also pertains to both samatha and vipassan?.
    This tetrad should be understood as dealing with contemplation of mind. The first is what?  Experiencing or making clear the mind consciousness. The second is gladdening consciousness. The third is concentrating consciousness. The fourth is liberating consciousness. This tetrad has to do with the contemplation of mind, the third of the four foundations of mindfulness.
   I told you once that whenever I come to small print, I am afraid to read it. You know the Sub-Commentaries are actually more difficult than the Commentaries. Venerable ???amoli used the Sub-Commentary for his explanation here. Sometimes he misunderstood a word or a whole sentence.
   ：At the actual time of insight: at the time of contemplation of dissolution. For dissolution is the furthest extreme of impermanence.； ．At the time of actual insight・ means at the time of contemplation on dissolution. Contemplation on dissolution comes a little later in vipassan?. The first knowledge you gain in vipassan? is defining mind and matter. After getting the momentary concentration, you come to see mind and matter clearly. After getting the momentary concentration, you come to see mind and matter clearly. Then you see the relationship between mind and matter or the relationship between what makes notes and what is noted as cause and effect. Then you come to see the impermanence of things. The next stage is seeing the arising and disappearing. Then the next stage is seeing dissolution. First you see arising and dissolution clearly. Later on you see dissolution more clearly, or dissolution becomes more prominent than arising. That is the statement here. ．The actual time of insight・ means at the time of the contemplation of dissolution. ：Dissolution is the furthest extreme of impermanence.； It is the highest stage of impermanence because after dissolution there will be nothing. Arising, going towards dissolution and dissolution itself - they are the three phases of existence. After dissolution the thing is gone. So ：Dissolution is the furthest extreme of impermanence.； When you see dissolution, you will not fail to see impermanence.
   ：So the meditator who is contemplating dissolution by its means sees under the heading of consciousness (He is watching consciousness and he sees) the whole field of formations as impermanent, not as permanent.； Here ．formations・ means everything in the world. When we say ．kamma formations・, we mean kamma or volition. But when we say ．formations・, we mean everything in the world. Everything which is formed, everything which is conditioned is called ．formation・ here. The P??i word is sa~kh?ra. The meaning of sa~kh?ra is made by causes or produced by causes.
   ：It is this contemplation of impermanence, etc., is called relinquishment as giving up and relinquishment as entering into because it gives up defilements along with aggregate producing kamma formations and because by seeing the flaws in what is formed and by inclining toward the opposite of what is formed, namely Nibb?na, it enters into that Nibb?na. Consequently the meditator who has that contemplation gives up defilements and enters into Nibb?na in the way stated.； Relinquishment will be treated later. There are two kinds of relinquishment. We will come to that later.
   ：Herein, the contemplation of what is impermanent as only impermanent is ．contemplation of impermanence・.； Do you see that sentence? There is something wrong here. The contemplation of impermanence is explained in two ways in the Sub-Commentary. Contemplation of what is impermanent is contemplation of impermanence and contemplation of something as impermanent is also called ．contemplation of impermanence・. The P??i word, following the sequence in P??i, is impermanence contemplation. ．Impermanence contemplation・ means contemplation of what is impermanent and contemplation on something as impermanent. In fact they mean the same thing, but it is how words are explained in the Commentary.
   ：This is a name for insight that occurs by taking formations of the three [mundane] planes [and leaving aside the supramundane] as impermanent.； Vipassan? meditation never takes the supramundane as object or it cannot take the supramundane as object. That is because vipassan? must see the impermanent nature and others of things. So it can only take mundane things as object. 
   ： ．From the perception of permanence・: from the wrong perception that occurs perceiving formed things as permanent, eternal; also the various views； - here I have to correct something. Strike out the words ．the・ and ．various・. ：Also consciousness and wrong view should be regarded as included under the heading of perception.； In the Commentary it is stated as ．from the perception of permanence・. ．From the perception of permanence・ really means from the perception of consciousness and from the wrong views of permanence. The other two are included under the heading of perception.
   ：Likewise with the perception of pleasure and so on. ．By means of the contemplation of dispassion・: by means of contemplation that occurs in the mode of dispassion for formations.； The others are not difficult to understand.
   Let us go to the last tetrad paragraph 234. Here contemplating impermanence - in connection with this phrase the author gives us what it is that is impermanent, what is impermanence, what is the contemplation of impermanence, and what is the one who contemplates impermanence. There are four things differentiated here. The first is the impermanent. What is the impermanent? The answer is the five aggregates. The five aggregates are those that are impermanent because their essence is rise and fall, and change. Their essence or their nature is to rise, to fall and to change.
   ：Impermanence is the rise and fall and change in those same aggregates.； Why do we say that the aggregates are impermanent? Because these aggregates arise, disappear and they change. Arising, disappearing and change is something by which we know that they are impermanent. That is why they are called ．impermanent・ here. They rise, and fall, and change.
   ：Or it is their non-existence after having been.； That means disappearing after coming into being. Everything comes into being and then disappears.
   ：The meaning is, it is the break-up of produced aggregates through their momentary dissolution since they do not remain in the same mode.； I am a little concerned about the word ．momentary・. I looked it up in the dictionary. It has at least two meanings. The first one, the first meaning is just for a moment. The other meaning of momentary is at every moment or moment to moment. Here moment to moment is meant. But when we say ．momentary unification of mind・ we mean for a short time. So there is a difference between the ．momentary・ used in one sentence and the ．momentary・ used in the other sentence. So in the expression ．momentary unification of mind・ we mean lasting only for a moment. But here ．momentary dissolution・ means moment to moment dissolution, dissolving at every moment.
   ：Contemplation of impermanence is contemplation of materiality, etc., as ．impermanent・ in virtue of that impermanence. One contemplating impermanence possesses that contemplation. So it is when one such as this is breathing in and breathing out that it can be understood of him ．He trains thus: I shall breathe in..shall breathe out contemplating impermanence・.； The person is the one who possesses contemplation of impermanence. So the impermanent, impermanence, contemplation of impermanence, and the one who possesses contemplation of impermanence - four things are differentiated here.
   Footnote 65 ：What is called ．permanent・ is what is lasting, eternal, like Nibb?na. What is called ．impermanent・ is what is not permanent, and is possessed of rise and fall. He said ．the five aggregates are impermanent・, signifying that they are formed dhammas as to meaning.； It should be ．formed dhammas as to reality・, not meaning. According to reality they are formed dhammas, they are conditioned dhammas.
   The P??i word ．attha・ has many meanings. The obvious meaning of it is meaning. The meaning of a word is called ．attha・. It has other meanings as well like substance, reality or thing. Here the P??i word ．atthato・ means in reality. So ：they are formed dhammas as to reality or in reality；, not as to meaning.
   ：Why? Because their essence is rise and fall and change; the meaning is that their individual essences have rise and fall and change. Herein, formed dhammas arising owing to cause and condition, their coming to be after non-existence, their acquisition of an individual self (．Individual self・ means just something like identity. It is not self with a capital S.), is ．rise・. Their momentary cessation when arisen is ．fall・. Their changedness due to aging is ．change・.； This is the explanation of the words.
   ：For just as when the occasion of arising dissolves and the occasion of dissolution [succeeds it] there is no break in the object (vatthu), so also there is no break in object   on the occasion facing dissolution (That means going toward dissolution. That means the middle phase of existence.), in other words, presence, which is what the term of common usage ．aging・ refers to.；
   Do you understand this? You don・t? What is ．break in the object・? When one misunderstands one word, then one does not understand the whole sentence. He misunderstood the P??i word ．bheda・. ．Bheda・ can mean dissolution or break. It can also mean difference. What is meant here is difference, difference in the thing. There are three submoments for one big moment - the arising, going towards dissolution, and dissolution. There are three submoments. During these three submoments one dhamma is said to be existing. The third submoment is different from the first submoment. At the third submoment which is different from the first submoment there is no difference in the thing. The thing is still existing. A given thing, a given dhamma must exist for these three submoments. At the first submoment or at the last submoment the thing is the same. There is no difference in the thing. In the same way there is no difference in the thing at the middle stage. This is what the Sub-Commentary is telling us.
   ：For just as when the occasion of arising dissolves and the occasion of dissolution [succeeds it] there is no break in the object； - no, this is not correct. ：Just as at the dissolution moment which is different from the arising moment there is no difference of the thing, so also there is no difference at the moment of aging or at the moment of presence, the middle moment.； 
   ：So it is proper that the aging of a single dhamma is meant, which is called ．momentary aging・. And without any reservation there must be no break (It should be difference.) in the object between the occasions of arising and dissolution, otherwise it follows that one thing arises and another dissolves.； One thing exists for three submoments. The third submoment is different from the first submoment. And the second submoment is also different from the first submoment and the third submoment. Although the submoments are different the thing is the same because it is existing for these three submoments. There should be no difference of object between the moments of arising, aging and disappearing. This is what the Sub-Commentary is telling us.
Student: So this is a theoretical construct about how you analyze moments.
Teacher: Yes, and how we explain moment to moment dissolution. According to Abhidhamma that which has three submoments of existence is real. Otherwise it is not real. So concepts are said not to possess these three phases of existence. We do not know when they come into being and when they dissolve. So they have no essence of their own, no existence of their own. Concept exists only in our minds, but not in reality. What is real according to Abhidhamma is that which has three phases of existence. That is why consciousness is real, mental states are real, and material properties are real. Nibb?na is real also. Nibb?na is real, but it has no beginning or end. So it is different from the other three.
   Paragraph 235 ：Contemplating fading away: there are two kinds of fading away, that is, fading away as destruction, and absolute fading away. Herein, fading away as destruction is the momentary dissolution of formations.； Moment to moment dissolution of formations is called ．fading away as destruction・ or ．dissolution・.
   ： ．Absolute fading away・ is Nibb?na. Contemplation of fading away is insight and it is the Path (So both insight and Path are meant here.), which occur as the seeing of these two.； So contemplating  of fading away can be at the vipassan? moments as well as at the Path moment.
   ：The same method of explanation applies to the clause, contemplating cessation.； So cessation and fading away here are used synonymously.
   ：Contemplating relinquishment: relinquishment is of two kinds too, that is to say, relinquishment as giving up, and relinquishment as entering into.； This word has two meanings - giving up and entering into.
   ：Relinquishment itself as [a way of] contemplation is ．contemplation of relinquishment・. (This is the word explanation.) For insight is called both ．relinquishment as giving up・ and ．relinquishment as entering into・ since [firstly] through substitution of opposite qualities it gives up defilements.； Now here there is a little inaccuracy. He gives up defilements together with resultant aggregates and the aggregate producing kamma formations. There are three things - defilements, resultant aggregates and aggregate producing kamma formations. These three things are abandoned, relinquished. It is through substitution of opposites. Sometimes people want to be literal when translating and that makes it a little more difficult to understand. ．substitution of opposite qualities・ simply means momentary abandonment.
   At this moment you don・t have attachment in your mind or you don・t have anger in your mind. You are substituting wholesome states for unwholesome states. So long as the wholesome states are in your mind, there will be no unwholesome states. This kind of abandonment is called ．substitution of opposites・. In fact it is what is popularly known as momentary abandonment.
   There are three kinds of abandonment - momentary, temporary, and absolute. Temporary abandonment comes when we get jh?nas. During jh?nas the mental defilements can be put away for some time. Their abandonment remains longer than the momentary abandonment. Since the jh?nas cannot abandon the defilements absolutely or all together, they come back when there are conditions for them. The third kind of abandonment occurs at the moment of enlightenment, at the moment of Magga. That is the total destruction of defilements so that they will not come back again.
   Here the first one is meant through the substitution of opposite qualities. We say that vipassan? abandons mental defilements. Vipassan? abandons mental defilements by the first way. It is just momentary abandonment.
   ：[Firstly] through substitution of opposite qualities it gives up defilements together with resultant aggregates with their aggregate producing kamma formations, and [secondly], through seeing the wretchedness of what is formed, it also enters into Nibb?na by inclining towards Nibb?na, which is the opposite of the formed.； Vipassan? is here called ．giving up・ and ．entering into・ let us say. ．Giving up・ means momentarily giving up defilements, their resultant aggregates, and then aggregate producing kamma formations. Then it is said to enter into Nibb?na. You know that vipassan? cannot take Nibb?na as object. Vipassan? takes formations as object. So here what we are to understand is ：through seeing the wretchedness of what is formed； - actually vipassan? sees the wretchedness of formations. ：It also enters into Nibb?na by inclining towards Nibb?na.； So when you see the wretchedness of formations, you want to go to the other thing which is unformed, which has no wretchedness of any kind. Vipassan? is said to enter Nibb?na, but not actually. Vipassan? cannot take Nibb?na as object.
   ：Also the Path is called both relinquishment as giving up defilements and relinquishment as entering into since it gives up defilements together with resultant aggregates with their aggregate producing kamma formations by cutting them off (That means by abandoning them all together.), and it enters into Nibb?na by it its object.； When Magga arises it takes Nibb?na as its object. The Path or Magga is called both ．giving up・ and ．entering into・.
   ：Also both [insight and Path knowledge] are called contemplation (anupassan?) because of their re-seeing successively (anu anu passan?).； ．Anu・ means again and again. ．Passan?・ means seeing. So seeing again and again and again.
   We come to the end of the fourth tetrad. This fourth tetrad deals only with pure insight while the previous three deal with serenity and insight.
Student: In Chinese meditation texts especially in early Zen writings there is something called ．stopping and seeing・. (First side of the tape ended so that the rest of the student・s comments were not recorded.)
Teacher: Many people interpreted that to be samatha and vipassan?, right? ．Stopping・ they explain as keeping the mind still on the object. ．Seeing・ is explained as seeing the three characteristics and the individual essence of things.
   If it means relinquishing, then vipassan? can also be called relinquishing. Then we have no samatha in this case because this last tetrad deals with pure vipassan?, not samatha. The four tetrads - the first one deals with what? Samatha meditation. The Commentary explains the four attainments of jh?na, and only after that one can change over to vipassan?. The second tetrad and third tetrad deal with what? Both samatha and vipassan?. The fourth deals with vipassan? only. There is no jh?na. This fourth tetrad deals with what? The fourth of the four foundations of mindfulness, dhamm?nupassan?. The first tetrad deals with contemplation of the body. The second tetrad deals with feelings. The third tetrad deals with consciousness. And the fourth tetrad deals with dhammas. This fourth tetrad deals with pure insight, vipassan? only. The other three deal with both samatha and vipassan?.
Student: It is not necessary to go through jh?na, right?
Teacher: Yes, that・s right. It is not necessary to go through jh?nas. Many modern authors tend to de-emphasize jh?nas. One author says that since the jh?nas are not mentioned in the ?n?p??asati Sutta, they are not important. But when we study a Sutta, we have to follow the tradition. The tradition or the Commentaries explain these four tetrads as dealing with samatha and vipassan?, with jh?na and vipassan?. Four jh?nas are mentioned in the Mah? Satipa??h?na Sutta although they are not mentioned in the ?n?p??asati Sutta. There are two Suttas in the whole P??i Canon that deal with breathing meditation and mindfulness meditation. In the ?n?p??asati Sutta no jh?nas are mentioned. These passages are from that Sutta. These passages however are explained with reference to jh?nas and vipassan? in the ancient Commentaries. So you cannot say that you do not find jh?nas in these two Suttas. In the ?n?p??asati Sutta jh?nas are not mentioned explicitly, but they are implied. In the Mah? Satipa??h?na Sutta jh?nas are mentioned when the Buddha defined the Noble Eightfold Path. So we cannot say that jh?nas were put into the Canon later. We have no proof of that. We may carelessly say that anything we do not like is an interpolation, or is added by monks, or something like that. There can be no definite proof that a portion of the Sutta was put in later. Who knows? So it is important to study such Suttas with the help of the ancient Commentaries. It is safe to follow them rather than going away from them and interpreting in the way one likes and not following the ancient tradition.
   Now let us look at the conclusion. First we need to look at footnote 67. There is some explanation about abandonment or relinquishment or giving up. ：And the giving up in this way is in the form of inducing non-occurrence.； When we say that Path (Magga) eradicates defilements, we do not really mean that it eradicates defilements. What is meant is that it does not allow defilements to come up again, so non-occurrence. The present defilements cannot be destroyed because they are already in our minds. And the past defilements are already past, so we don・t have to do anything about them. They are already gone. The future things are not yet come. The Path or Magga does not eradicate the present, nor the past, nor the future defilements, but the arising of Magga renders them inoperative. They will not arise again. It is like destroying the potential of things. It talks about this here. This subject will be talked about later towards the end of the book.
   In paragraph 239 in the second line we have the words ．clear vision・ and ．deliverance・. Here ．clear vision・ means Path (Magga). ．Deliverance・ means Fruition (Phala).
   Then the benefits of this meditation are given. All of them come from the ?n?p??asati Sutta. Then there is the story of a monk who was an Arahant and who practiced the mindfulness of breathing meditation. He knew when he would die. He asked his companions if they had seen how an Arahant attained Nibb?na. Some said in the sitting posture. Then he said I will show you. He was going to die. He knew the very moment that he was going to die. So he said that he would die or he would enter Nibb?na walking. He made a line in the ambulatory. Then he said ：I will go to the end of the space. When I come back and cross the line, I will die then.； He did die as he said. So those who practice ?n?p??asati meditation can even know when their life force will be stopped or when they are going to die. This is also a benefit of ?n?p??asati meditation.
   In paragraph 241 there is the explanation of three kinds of finals - final in becoming, final in jh?na, and final in death. With regard to final in death there is a saying that those that arise along with the 16th consciousness preceding the death consciousness cease together with the death consciousness. There are four kinds of material properties or four kinds of matter - those caused by kamma, those caused by citta or mind, those caused by climate, and those caused by food. Those caused by kamma must disappear at the same moment as death consciousness. At the last submoment of death consciousness they must also disappear. This is because the material properties caused by mind cannot live after the moment of death. What we call life or what is translated as vital principle (j?vita) or vital life means that kamma-born quality in the material properties. That kamma-born quality in the material properties must die with death consciousness or must disappear with death consciousness. The life of material properties is 17 times that of consciousness. Consciousness lasts for only one big moment or for three submoments. So the material properties last for 17 big moments or 17 thought moments. Since the vital principle must dissolve or disappear at the last submoment of death consciousness, it must have arisen how many moments before? 16 moments before, 16 moments plus the death moment. At the end of the 17th moment the life principle must disappear. That・s why here it says the 16th consciousness preceding the death consciousness. If you want to read more about when the different material properties disappear in a life, you can read the sixth chapter of The Manual of Abhidhamma.
   Now we go to the Recollection of Peace. ．Recollection of Peace・ really means Recollection of Nibb?na. ：one who wants to develop the Recollection of Peace mentioned next to mindfulness of breathing should go into solitary retreat and recollect the special qualities of Nibb?na, in other words, the stilling of all suffering as follows: ．Bhikkhus, in so far as there are dhammas, whether formed or unformed (That means conditioned or unconditioned.) fading away is pronounced the best of them, that is to say, the disillusionment of vanity, the elimination of thirst, the abolition of reliance, the termination of the round, the destruction of craving, fading away, cessation, Nibb?na.； These words will be explained.
   ：Herein, in so far as. Dhammas [means] individual essences.； There is a long footnote here about dhammas. Footnotes give me a headache because first I have to find the passages in the Commentaries and then check the translation with them. The way they are written makes it very difficult to translate them. Another problem is that English is not my mother tongue. So it is not easy.
   Dhamma comes from the root ．dhar・. ．Dhar・ means to hold. ：In such passages as ．Dhammas that are concepts・ even a non-entity is thus called a ．dhamma・.； ．Dhamma・ can mean anything in the world. Even the concepts are called ．dhammas・. Why are they called ．dhammas・? Because they are born and affirmed by knowledge. They are carried or upheld, dhar. That kind of dhamma is excluded by saying here ： ．Dhammas・ mean individual essences.； When it is said that dhammas mean individual essences, then the author wanted to exclude concepts from being called ．dhammas・ here. Here ．dhammas・ mean those that have individual essences and not concepts. ：That kind of dhamma is excluded by his saying ．Dhammas [mean] individual essences・,；
   ：The act of becoming which constitutes existingness in the ultimate sense, is essence; it is with essence, thus it is an individual essence.； The P??i word ．sabh?va・, this word is also an important word. First bh?va is defined. ．Bh?va・ means becoming. The act of becoming is bh?va. Something which is with the act of becoming is called ．sabh?va・. The ．act of becoming・ means existingness in the ultimate sense. That means having three moments of existence - arising, aging and disappearing. Such things are called ．sabh?va・ because they are with bh?va. So in this word ．sa・ means with and ．bh?va・ means the act of becoming or let us say existence. So things which have their own existence are called ．sabh?va・. 
   In other places or in the footnote itself sabh?va is explained in another way. There ．sa・ means one・s own and ．bh?va・ means essence or something like that. So ．sabh?va・ means one・s own essence or one・s own nature. Or it means common essence or common nature. So ．sabh?va・ can mean different things in different contexts. If it is used as a substantive, then it means something that has its own becoming or something that has existence in the ultimate sense. In other places it may mean one・s own individual nature or one・s own individual essence or common essence or common nature.  
   There are two kinds of nature, individual and common. I am Burmese. So being Burmese is my individual essence. I am a human being. This is my common essence, common with other beings. So ．sabh?va・ can mean these things.
   So here we should not translate as individual essences, but as some things which have individual essence. What is ．essence・? This is an abstract noun, right? It doesn・t mean a substantive thing. Some thing which has an individual essence or some things which have individual essences are called ．dhammas・ here.
   Here (footnote 68) it is a long footnote. ：The individual essence consisting in, say, hardness as that of earth, or touching as that of contact, is not common to all dhammas. The generality is the individual essence common to all consisting in impermanence, etc.； Let us suppose we have earth element. Earth element has individual essence and general or common essence. Its individual essence is hardness or softness. Hardness or softness is the individual essence of earth element, not shared by other elements or dhammas. The earth element is impermanent. Its impermanence is the common or general essence of it. In this way we can have the specific or individual essence and the general essence.
   With regard to time Venerable ???amoli quotes the M|la ??k? in the footnote. ：Though time is determined by the kind of consciousness [e.g. as specified in the first paragraph of the Dhammasangan?] and is non-existent as to individual essence, yet as the non-entity before and after the moment in which those [conascent and co-present] dhammas occur, it is called the ．container-adh?karana・; it is perceived (symbolized) only as the state of a receptacle (?dh?ra-bh?va).； I wonder if he understood it.
   First we have to have a little knowledge of Abhidhamma. In Abhidhamma it is said that on such an occasion at such a time that, let us say, the first kusala citta arises. ．At such a time・, the words ．at such a time・ in English (In P??i it is one word) are put in the locative case. ．At・, ．on, or ．in・ are in the locative case. The P??i word used here is samaya. ．Samaya・ can mean time or it can mean occasion. Let us say it means time. Why is time the location of consciousness? He is going to explain this. ．Receptacle・ and ．container just mean location. Time is non-existent according to Abhidhamma.
   ：Though time is determined by the kind of consciousness and is non-existent as to individual essence； - so according to reality time has no existence. So time is non-existent, but time is determined by citta. That means the time when a given citta arises. It is determined by the citta. So why can time be the location of citta? Time is non-existent. How can it be the location of citta? The answer is when a consciousness arises (Before it arises there is nothing and after it dissolves there is nothing.) during the three phases of existence it is called existent. At that time consciousness is in existence. So time is said to be the location or receptacle of the consciousness. Actually there is no time. Time is not existent or not existing according to ultimate reality. Although it is non-existent, it is said to be the location of citta. Before the arising of citta there is no citta and after the dissolution of citta there is no citta. That is why time is said to be the location of citta. Therefore the Buddha said ：At such a time the first kusala citta arises； and so on.
Student: Would the same hold true for space?
Teacher: Space is also mentioned here. Space and time are said to be non-existent according to Abhidhamma. So the translation itself is not correct here. You know you need to be very familiar with the language because it looks the same but it has to be understood differently. We have the words ．bh?va・ and abh?va・. Abh?va is misunderstood here. He translated abh?va as non-entity, but what it means is non-existent. So time can be the location or receptacle of citta because before the arising and after the dissolution of citta and its concomitants they do not exist. So it is like a reference, the citta arises at this time or that time.
   Now in the text itself the explanation of different words - fading away, disillusionment of vanity, and then ．on coming to it・ are used. ．On coming to it・ they are relinquished, they fade away and son on. ．On coming to it・ really means on account of it or on taking it as object.
   ．Fading away・ is not Nibb?na, but Nibb?na is described with the words which can mean fading away. The P??i word ．vir?ga・ is used here and other words as well. Vir?ga is simply translated as fading away, but the act of fading away is not Nibb?na. Nibb?na is not fading away. Nibb?na is something. Although Nibb?na has no existence, it is . Nibb?na is something. When Magga Citta arises, it eradicates mental defilements. It makes mental defilements fade away. Magga Citta only arises when it takes Nibb?na as object. If it does not take Nibb?na as object, it cannot arise. So Nibb?na is a condition for Magga Citta (Path Consciousness) to arise. Nibb?na is said to be instrumental in making mental defilements fade away by Path (Magga). All these words are to be understood in this way. Fading away, termination of the round, extinction, whatever it says, it means Nibb?na is instrumental in the extinction of suffering. They are to be understood in this sense. It is not that fading away is Nibb?na, but Nibb?na is something instrumental in making defilements fade away by Magga.
   In the middle of the footnote there are the words change-of-lineage. What the author of the Sub-Commentary was saying was that change-of-lineage immediately precedes the moment of Path. That citta is called ．change-of-lineage・. That citta takes Nibb?na as object. Nibb?na which has to be realized by or which has to be seen by the moment of change-of-lineage must be one that has the profundity surpassing the nature of belonging to the three periods of time. Nibb?na is timeless. Nibb?na does not belong to the present, the past, or the future. In order for Nibb?na to be realized by change-of-lineage it must not belong to any of the three periods. That is what is meant there.
   OK. Now we come to the end of upasamasati. There are other descriptions of Nibb?na. You will find them in paragraph 248. ：Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the unformed..the truth..the hard-to-see..the undecaying..the lasting..the undiversified..the deathless..the auspicious..the safe..the marvellous..the intact..the unaffected..the purity..the island..the shelter・.； There are more in the Sa?yutta Nik?ya. You can pick up some positive words from this and say that Nibb?na is a positive state.
   Then the benefits of the contemplation on Nibb?na or the contemplation on peace are given. We have come to the end of this chapter.

                                 S?dhu!              S?dhu!                S?dhu!

We offer this transcription of a Dhamma class with Venerable U S?l?nanda with the hope that it will be beneficial for your understanding of the Buddha・s teachings. This transcription has not been edited. It is the record of spontaneous exchanges between the teacher and students. Therefore it is possible that there are some errors. We are certain that such errors are infrequent and minimal. Say?daw is a meticulous and careful teacher and offers these teachings in this manner out of compassion for those people who are interested in the serious study and practice of meditation and Buddhism.
        










