Chapter 9
(Tape 21 / Ps: 1-54)

   Today we begin the chapter on the divine abidings (the brahm? vih?ras), chapter nine. We may expect the Commentator to give us the meanings or the definition of brahm? vih?ra, mett? and so on at the beginning of the chapter. It should be done that way, but the definitions and meanings are given towards the end. Let몭s go to the explanation of the words brahm? vih?ra in paragraph 105.
   몮And here it may be asked: But why are loving-kindness, compassion, gladness, and equanimity, called divine abidings? And why are they only four? And what is their order? And why are they called measureless states in the Abhidhamma?몯
   몮It may be replied: The divineness of the abiding (brahmavih?rat?) should be understood here in the sense of best and in the sense of immaculate.몯 We need to look at the P??i words 몬brahm?몭 and 몬vih?ra몭. 몬Brahm?몭 can mean the best or immaculate. When we say the word 몬brahm?몭, the first meaning that usually comes to mind is a being, a higher kind of celestial being that is called brahm?. Brahm? beings are better than or higher than beings belonging to the sense-sphere or belonging to the world of human beings or lower celestial beings. So the word 몬brahm?몭 came to mean the good or the best and also immaculate or pure.
   몮For these abidings are the best in being the right attitude towards beings.몯 These abidings or actually these practices of meditation are the best because they are the right attitude towards beings - loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity.
   몮And just as Brahm? Gods abide with immaculate minds, so the meditators who associate themselves with these abidings abide on an equal footing with Brahm? Gods.몯 Another explanation is 몬brahm? vih?ra몭 means vih?ra like that of the brahm?s. 몬Vih?ra몭 means living or abiding, so abiding like that of brahm?s. It is said that the brahm?s in their world just practice peaceful kinds of meditation. There is nothing for them to do other than going into jh?nas, peaceful kinds of meditation. So 몬brahm? vih?ra몭 means the abiding of the brahm? gods. So they are called divine abidings in the sense of best and in the sense of immaculate. We can explain it as the best way of abiding, or the best way of living, or living like that of the brahm?s. It is translated as divine abidings or sometimes they are called sublime states.
   There are four brahm? vih?ras or four divine abidings. They are (1) mett? (loving-kindness), (2) karu?? (compassion), (3) mudit? (gladness), (4) upekkh? (equanimity). Today we will study mett?. Let몭s go to the explanation of mett? in paragraph 92. We should clearly understand what is meant by this word 몬mett?몭 (loving-kindness).
   몮Now as to the meaning firstly loving-kindness, compassion, gladness and equanimity: it fattens (mejjati), thus it is loving-kindness (mett?).몯 The word 몬mett?몭 is derived from a P??i root. The P??i root is 몬mid몭. It has the meaning to fatten. Actually here it means to be moist or something like sticky. That is because when you have love for someone, you are sort of attached or glued to that person. 몮It is solvent (siniyhati) is the meaning.몯 It is moist or it is gluttonous. That is why it is called mett?. That is one explanation.
   Another explanation is : 몮Also: it comes about with respect to a friend.몯 A friend is called 몬mitta몭 in P??i. The state of a friend or the behavior of a friend is called 몬mett?몭. That is according to P??i grammatical rules. In this second explanation the word 몬mett?몭 comes from the word 몬mitta몭, which means a friend. The behavior of a friend or behavior towards a friend is called 몬mett?몭.
   What is mett?? It is a kind of love, but it is not mixed with attachment or craving. It is pure, wholesome desire for the well-being of beings, for the welfare of beings.
   If you have studied Abhidhamma, you will know that there are 52 mental factors or 52 cetasikas. Among the 52 mental factors mett? is adosa. Adosa is non-hatred or non-anger. Mett? is the opposite of anger or the opposite of hatred. It is the wholesome desire for the well-being or welfare of all beings. Now we can go to the beginning of the chapter.
   When we want to practice mett? meditation or loving-kindness meditation, what we must do first is to review the danger in hate and to review the advantage in patience. That is before doing something we must know the danger in the opposite of what we are going to do and also the benefits of the thing we are going to do.
   First we need to review the danger in hate. When we see the danger in hate or in anger, we will want to avoid. We will want to get away from that hate or anger.
   몮To start with he should review the danger in hate and the advantage in patience. Why? Because hate has to be abandoned and patience attained in the development of this meditation subject and he cannot abandon unseen dangers and attain unknown advantages.몯 If he does not see any danger, he cannot abandon them. If he does not see the advantages, he will not attain them. First the meditator has to see the danger in hate and the advantage in patience.
   Danger and hate should be seen in accordance with such Suttas as this. There are many Suttas where Buddha taught about the danger in hate and the advantage of patience. (Tape cuts away and it sounds like Say?daw is beginning anew.)
   Today we begin the chapter on the divine abidings. The P??i word for divine abidings is 몬brahm? vih?ra몭. The definition of that word is towards the end of the chapter. The word 몬mett?몭 or 몬loving-kindness몭 is defined as that which is moist or which is gluttonous. Mett? or loving-kindness is a wholesome desire for the well-being of all beings.
   Before we practice loving-kindness meditation this book says that we must do two things. One is to review the danger in hate and the other is to review the advantage in patience. If we do not see the danger in hate, we will not be able to abandon hate. If we do not see advantages in being patient, we will not get these advantages. So danger in hate and advantage in patience should be reviewed.
   This we could do by reading some Suttas. The first is the danger in hate. 몮Friends, when a man hates, is a prey to hate and his mind is obsesses by hate, he kills living beings몯 and so on. When a man is angry, he may kill a being or do something to injure another person and so on. So there is this danger in hate or this danger in anger. There are many Suttas similar to this Sutta in the Sutta Pi?aka. The reference given here is A, 1, 216. If you want to read the original Sutta, that is the English translation, I can give you the reference. 몬A몭 means A~guttara Nik?ya. The translation of A~guttara Nik?ya is named 몬Gradual Sayings몭. There are five books or five volumes in this collection. So this is in Gradual Sayings, volume 1, page 196. You may read there in more detail.
   몮And the advantage in patience should be understood according to such Suttas as these:
     몬No higher rule, the Buddhas say, than patience,
      and no Nibb?na higher than forbearance
      Patience in force, in strong array:
      Tis him I call a brahman몭.몯
Here a brahman means a h man. So Buddha said I call him a holy man who has patience as an army or as a force and who is strong in forbearance.
   몮No greater thing exists than patience.몯 These are from other Suttas. By reviewing, by reading, by remembering these Suttas we can see danger in hate and advantage in patience.
   After reviewing danger in hate and advantage in patience what should we do? 몮Thereupon he should embark upon the development of loving-kindness for the purpose of secluding the mind from hate seen as a danger and introducing it to patience known as an advantage.몯
   몮But when he begins, he must know that some persons are of the wrong sort at the very beginning and that loving-kindness should be developed towards certain kinds of persons and not towards certain other kinds at first.몯 So when we practice loving-kindness meditation, we must first understand to whom we must first practice loving-kindness meditation. In this book it is said that 몮loving-kindness should not be developed at first towards the following four kinds of persons: an antipathetic person (That means a person whom you hate.), a very dearly loved friend, a neutral person, and a hostile person. Also it should not be developed specifically towards the opposite sex, or towards a dead person.몯 It will be explained later.
   Why should it not be developed toward antipathetic persons and others? That is because to put antipathetic persons in a dear one몭s place is fatiguing, It is very difficult. So we should not begin with such persons and other persons also. We should not radiate thoughts of loving-kindness to them in the beginning.
   It should not be developed towards persons of the opposite sex because lust can arise in the person who practices loving-kindness towards persons of the opposite sex. It is not suitable to practice loving-kindness towards persons of the opposite sex in the beginning or maybe it is better not to practice specifically, but one may practice to all men or to all women. That we should do. Or if we can really keep ourselves from getting lustful thoughts or attachment, we may be able to do that. But it is very difficult especially in the beginning to keep these thoughts from coming up in our mind. So it is best to avoid persons of the opposite sex in the beginning.
   The it says that it should not be developed towards a dead person. We can send thoughts to him, but we cannot get any jh?nas from that practice. The story of a young monk is given here. He was familiar with jh?na through loving-kindness. That means he practiced jh?na through loving-kindness. He could enter into jh?na easily. But when he practiced loving-kindness towards his teacher and tried to enter into jh?na, he could not do that. So he went to another Elder and asked him why he could not do that. He said I am familiar with the jh?nas through loving-kindness meditation, but now I practice loving-kindness meditation to my teacher and I could not get into the jh?na.
   What did the Elder say? 몮Seek the sign, friend.몯 Just that. 몬Seek the sign몭 means examine your object, the object of your meditation. 몮He did so. Finding that his teacher had died, he proceeded with developing loving-kindness inspired by another and attained absorption.몯 So he changed his object to another person who was living. We cannot send thoughts of loving-kindness to a person who is dead and at the same time we don몭t know that they are dead.
   What about your parents who have died and you want to send thoughts to them? is that possible? I think it is because I am doing that. I send thoughts to them. I know they are dead. So I think of them as reborn in some other state, say, a state among the devas and I send thoughts to them. In that way we can practice loving-kindness to dead persons. But if you don몭t know that they are dead and you are sending thoughts to them as living persons, it won몭t help.
Student: Is there a difference between sending thoughts of goodwill and attaining jh?na?
Teacher: You attain jh?na after you send thoughts. It will be explained here. In order to attain jh?na you have to practice seriously and try to break the barriers. And after the barriers are broken you are said to get the access concentration. Then you continue practicing loving-kindness and you will get jh?na.
Student: Even towards a person that is dead?
Teacher: Oh, no. You cannot attain jh?na, but you can send thoughts to those persons.
   몮First of all it should be developed only towards oneself, doing it repeatedly thus.몯 When we practice loving-kindness, we begin with ourselves. Then there are questions and answers about practicing towards oneself as to whether it is in accordance with the teachings in other books. That is because in the Texts it does not say that first you should practice loving-kindness towards yourself and then that you practice to other beings. It is not explicitly said. It may seem to conflict with those Texts. But the author says here that it does not conflict. That is because it refers to absorption. In the P??i Texts when it says 몮A monk pervades one direction with his heart filled with loving-kindness몯 and so on, that means for jh?na for absorption. 
   몮But this [initial development towards oneself] refers to [making oneself] an example.몯 Practicing towards oneself is to make ourself an example. 몮I am happy. Just as I want to be happy, and I dread pain, just as I want to live and not to die, so do other beings.몯 So may they be happy, live long and so on. In order to make ourselves an example first we practice loving-kindness towards ourselves.
   Practicing loving-kindness towards ouselves will not lead to the attainment of any absorption. 몮For even if he developed loving-kindness for a hundred or a thousand years in this way..absorption would never arise.몯 But it is best to begin with ourselves and then to practice towards other beings. 
   In paragraph 10 몮for even if he developed loving-kindness for a hundred or a thousand years in this way 몬I am happy몭몭.몯 Actually it is not 몬I am happy몭 but 몬May I be happy몭. When you practice loving-kindness towards yourself, you say to yourself 몬May I be happy몭. You repeat  it in your mind 몬May I be happy. May I be happy.몭 The P??i word for 몬I am happy몭 and 몬May I be happy몭 is the same. In P??i it is aha? avero homi. 몬Avero homi몭 may mean either 몬I am happy몭 or 몬May I be happy몭. Here it means may I be happy. When you practice loving-kindness towards yourself, you do not say 몬I am happy. I am happy몭, but you say 몬May I be happy몭. So it is taking oneself as an example.
      몮I visited all quarters with my mind
       Nor found I any dearer than myself,
       Self is likewise to every other dear;
       Who loves himself should (not 몬will몭) never harm another.몯
When you look at all beings, there is no one dearer than yourself. For other persons it is also the same. If you love yourself, you do not harm others. So he should pervade himself with loving-kindness.
   몮After that, in order to proceed easily, he can recollect such gifts, kind words, etc., as inspire love and endearment, such virtue, learning, etc., as inspire respect and reverence met with in a teacher or his equivalent or a preceptor or his equivalent, developing loving-kindness towards him  in the way beginning 몬May this good man be happy and free from suffering몭.몯 After practicing towards ourselves, we practice towards a person. Because the book is written for monks it says it should be practiced towards a teacher or towards a preceptor. Or it should be for someone who is like a teacher or who is like a preceptor.
   When I teach meditation, my sequence of sentences is: 몮May I be well, happy and peaceful; may my teachers be well, happy and peaceful.몯 Only after that do I say 몮May my parents be well, happy and peaceful.몯 That is because for monks, for those who have left the home-life teachers come first before parents. Parents are left behind. Teachers are like parents to a monk. We put teachers before parents. But lay people may practice towards parents first and teachers later.
   몮But if this bhikkhu does not rest content with just that much and wants to break down the barriers, he should next after that, develop loving-kindness towards a very dearly loved friend.몯 After practicing towards a revered teacher, one should practice towards a very dearly loved friend.
   몮Then towards a neutral person, as a very dearly loved friend몯 - 몬as a dearly loved friend몭 is not correct. Venerable ???amoli misunderstood some words here. What is meant here is after the very dearly loved friend he practices towards a neutral person. Then after the neutral person he practices towards the hostile person. So first you practice towards a very dearly loved friend. When you have practiced for some time, you gain familiarity with the practice. Then you move to a neutral person. Then after practicing towards a neutral person, you move towards a hostile person if there is any.
   몮And while he does so, he should make his mind malleable and wieldy in each instance before passing on to the next.몯 That means not to do like we do every day. We say 몮May I be well, happy and peaceful; may my friends be well, happy and peaceful; may the indifferent persons be well, happy and peaceful; may the unfriendly persons (That means the hostile persons.) be well, happy and peaceful.몯 We are doing all that in one sitting. But in fact what we should do is practice towards a dearly loved person for some days. Then we should practice for some days towards a neutral person and then towards a hostile person.
Student: In paragraph 12 it says 몮then towards a neutral person as a very dearly loved friend몯 -
Teacher: No, that is not so.
Student: That should be eliminated?
Teacher: 몬As a very dearly loved friend몭 - that should go. And also 몮then towards a hostile person as neutral몯 - 몬as neutral몭 should go.
   If you have no enemy, the you don몭t have to do that. 몮But if he has no enemy, or he is of the type of a great man who does not perceive another as an enemy even when the other does him harm, he should not interest himself as follows: 몬Now that my consciousness of loving-kindness has become wieldy towards a neutral person, I shall apply it to a hostile one몭.몯 This is because he has no hostile persons. He has no enemies. And he should not find one and practice this. 
   Wit regard to practicing towards a hostile person we come to some problems here. 몮If resentment arises in him when he applies his mind to a hostile person because he remembers wrongs done by that person, he should get rid of the resentment by entering repeatedly into loving-kindness [jh?na] towards any of the first-mentioned persons and then, after he has emerged each time, directing loving-kindness towards that person.몯  These are the ways of getting rid of resentment. But this first way is something like strange. Don몭t you find it strange? We don몭t know how to practice loving-kindness meditation. We are going to practice loving-kindness meditation. He instructs us to enter into jh?na to get rid of resentment. We don몭t even practice loving-kindness yet. Here the author is saying you should go into jh?na to get rid of resentment. I don몭t know why it is put at the beginning. Maybe it should go at the end. That is the first one.
       몮But if it does not die out in spite of his efforts, then:
         Let him reflect upon the saw
         With other figures of such kind,
         And strive, and strive repeatedly,
         To leave resentment far behind.몯
That means to reflect  upon the simile of the saw and other teachings, teachings of the Suttas. 몮He should admonish himself this way: 몬Now, you who get angry, has not the Blessed One said this: 몮Bhikkhus, even if bandits brutally severed limb from limb with a two-handled saw, he who entertained hate in his heart on that account would not be one who carried out my teaching.몯
   I always point out this teaching. I think when Jesus said 몮Give the other cheek몯, he was just echoing this piece of advice. He may have learned these teachings when he was in India. Some people believe that during the lost years he went to India and learned from Buddhist monks there.
   Then the others:
     몮To repay angry men in kind
       Is worse than to be angry first;
       Repay angry men not in kind
       And win a battle hard to win.몯
I like this very much. 
     몮The weal of both he does promote,
       His own and then other몭s too,
       Who shall another몭s anger know
       And mindfully maintain his peace.몭
몮To repay angry men in kind is worse than to be angry first. Repay not angry men in kind and win a battle hard to win.몯 If somebody gets angry with you and you don몭t get angry, reckon yourself as having won a battle hard to win.
   Then there are some other Suttas. 몮Bhikkhus, there are seven things gratifying and helpful to an enemy that happen to one who is angry, whether a man or a woman.몯 I hope you have read all of these. There are some things which your enemy wants you to be or not to be. Why let them get their satisfaction by being angry? That is the gist of this Sutta.
   몮As a log from a pyre, burnt at both ends and fouled in the middle, serves neither for timber in the village nor for timber in the forest, so is such a person as this I say.몯 A person who gets angry is like a stick used in cremating dead bodies. It cannot be used as timber in the village or in the forest.
   몮If you are angry now, you will be one who does not carry out the Blessed One몭s teaching; by repaying an angry man in kind you will be worse than the angry man and not win the battle hard to win; you will yourself do to yourself the things that help your enemy; and you will be a pyre log.몯 This is the second method of getting rid of resentment. This is reflecting upon the teachings of the Buddha with regard resentment.
    Then we have the third one. 몮If his resentment subsides when he strives and makes effort in this way, it is good. If not then he should remove irritation by remembering some controlled and purified state in that person, which inspires confidence when remembered.몯 When you are angry with some person, try to see good things in him instead of seeing bad things in him. When we are angry with someone, we tend to see only the bad things in him. We don몭t want to see or we refuse to see the good things in him. Here the advice is to remember 몮some controlled or purified state in that person.몯
That means to remember the good things in him. Remembering them your resentment may disappear.
   Then the advice given here is that there are people who are purified and controlled as to their bodily actions, or as to their verbal actions, or as to their mental actions. Try to find whatever is good in him. It may be his bodily actions, or his speech, or his mind. Whatever is good in him try to see it. Try to get rid of resentment.
   몮But there may be another in whom not even one of these three things is controlled.몯 What about a person who has none of these? It is said that some person may be good in his bodily behaviour, but not in his speech. Or there may be someone who is controlled in speech but not in his bodily behaviour. But what if there is a person who does not even have one of these three things? 몮Then compassion for that person should be aroused thus.몯 Here instead of practicing mett? you practice compassion (karu??) towards that person. 몮Though he is going about in the human world now nevertheless after a certain number of days he will find himself in [one of] the great hells or the sixteen prominent hells. For irritation subsides too through compassion.몯
   What about a person who has all three of these controlled states? 몮Then he can remember any of the three in that person, whichever he likes; for the development of loving-kindnesstowards such a person is easy.몯
   몮And in order to make the meaning of this clear the following Sutta from the Book of Fives should be acted in full.몯 So he wants us to read the Sutta in full. That is in Gradual Sayings, third volume, page 137.
   The fourth method is to admonish yourself thus:
     몮Suppose an enemy has hurt
       You now in what is his domain,
       Why try yourself as well to hurt
       Your mind? - That is not his domain.몯
What is 몬his domain몭 ? 몬His domain몭 means my body. He has hurt me bodily. 몮Why try yourself as well to hurt your mind?몯 When you get angry, your mind is also hurt. So why do you do that?
Student: So he can hurt your body, but hurting your mind is your doing.
Teacher: That몭s right.
    몮In tears you left your family.몯 That is not so. 몮You left your family who were in tears.몯 You left them and they were crying when you left. It is not that you left with tears. 
Student: Maybe both.
Teacher: No, no. Because you have thought about it thoroughly and decided to leave them. So you do not feel any regret or sorrow in leaving them. But your parents or your family members may not want you to go forth. So they may be crying. So 몬in tears몭 is describing your family, but not you.
     몮You left your family who were in tears.
       They had been kind and helpful too.
        So why not leave your enemy,
        The anger that brings harm to you?몯
You left your family who were kind to you. Why don몭t you leave your enemy the anger that brings harm to you?
     몮This anger that you entertain
       Is gnawing at the very roots
       Of all the virtues that you guard -
       Who is there suchh a fool as you?

       Another does ignoble deeds, 
       So you are angry - How is this?
       Do you then want to copy too
       The sort of acts that he commits?

       Suppose another, to annoy, 
       Provokes you with some odious act, 
       Why suffer anger to spring up,
       And do as he would have you do?

       If you get angry, then maybe
       You make him suffer, maybe not;
       Though with the hurt that anger brings
       You certainly are punished now.몯
That means right now you inflict yourself with anger which is suffering.
     몮If anger-blinded enemies
       Set out to tread the path of woe,
       Do you by getting angry too
       Intend to follow heel to toe?

       If hurt is done you by a foe
       Because of anger on your part,
       Then put your anger down, for why
        Should you be harassed groundlessly?몯
That means your anger is put on a wrong object. 몮If hurt is done you by a foe because of anger on your part몯 - that really means because you are there the other peerson can hurt you. So actually you are the cause of his hurting you.
   몮Then put your anger down, for why should you be harassed groundlessly.몯 몬Groundlessly몭 here means that you are vexed on a wrong object. You should be angry with yourself or something like that because you are also the cause of this hurt that is done by another person.
     몮Since states last but a moment몭s time
       Those aggregates, by which was done
       The odious act, have ceased, so now
        What is it you are angry with?몯
That is applying the Law of Impermanence here.
     몮Whom shall he hurt, who seeks to hurt
       Another, in the other몭s absence?
       Your presence is the cause of hurt; 
       Why are you angry, then, with him?몯
Yourself is the cause. This is admonishing oneself with these reflections or considerations.
   Then the next one, the fifth one is: 몮He should review the fact that he himself and others are owners of their deeds (kamma).몯 That means review the Law of Kamma. 몮Will not this kamma of yours that has anger as its source lead to your own harm? For you are the owner of your deeds, heir of your deeds몯 and so on. When you get angry, you have unwholesome mental states (akusala). This akusala will give you painful results because beings are owners of their deeds.
   몮And this is not the kind of deed to bring you to full enlightenment, to undeclared enlightenment.몯 몬Undeclared enlightenment몭 is the translation here of Pacceka Buddha.
Student: Pacceka?
Teacher: Yes, in Sanskrit 몬pratyeka몭. They are in some ways like Buddhas and in some ways like Arahants. They are a step higher than the Arahants but lower than the Buddhas. The Buddha is called 몬samm?sambuddha몭. 몬Samm?몭 means rightly. 몬Sam몭 means by oneself. 몬Buddha몭 means enlightenment.
Student: How do you admonish yourself? It seems like if you were angry with yourself or somebody, it creates problems. It seems like there needs to be some kind of control of what you are doing. It says he should admonish himself.
Teacher: The verses given are how you admonish yourself. That means you talk to yourself. You reflect on the meaning of the verses. I am angry with him. Since I have anger in my mind, I am hurting myself. So why should I get angry? Talking to oneself is what is meant by admonishing here.
   So Pacceka Buddha - the P??i word 몬pacceka몭 means separate, so separate Buddhas. They become a Buddha without the help of any person. That is why they are called 몬Sambuddha몭. They are self-enlightenend ones. But they are not called 몬samm?sambuddha몭 because they are not as great as the fully enlightened ones. Here it is translated as 몬undeclared enlightenment몭. Maybe the word 몬undeclared몭 is used because the Pacceka Buddhas do not usually live in the villages or the cities. They are ones who want to be secluded and live in the Himalayas. They seldom visit or go to the places where human beings live. That is why they are called 몬undeclared Buddhas몭.
   So this anger will not bring you to full enlightenment as a Buddha, or to enlightenment as a Pacceka Buddha, or to enlightenment as a disciple and so on. So you talk to yourself in this way.
   Also as you reflect on yourself, you reflect on the other person. Now he is angry with me. His anger will not lead him to enlightenment as a Buddha and so on. The anger will give him painful results. In this way you may be able to get rid of resentment.
   The next, the sixth one is to review the special qualities of the Master몭s former conduct. You must think of the Bodhisatta.In the Buddha몭s lives as a Bodhisatta he had done many noble things. By reflecting on his former conduct you may be able to get rid of resentment.
   A number of J?takas are referred to here. The first one is the S?lavant Birth Story. Do you have the J?taka book here?
Student: Yes.
Teacher: You can find these J?takas in that book. 몮When his friends rose to prevent his kingdom of 300 leagues being seized by an enemy king who had been incited by a wicked minister in whose mind his own queen had sown hate for him, he did not allow them to lift a weapon.몯 The other king seized him and buried him to the neck and he was left at the cemetery with the other ministers. Even though he was treated that way, he did not get angry with that king. With much effort he got out of that state and went back to his palace. Then he made peace with the other king. The king whose name was S?lavant practiced patience or forbearance with the other king who tried to kill him. In the same way you should not have anger towards such persons.
   In paragraph 28 the second story is about Khantiv?di. The Bodhisatta was a hermit at that time. He practiced patience at that time. The king was a very cruel person at that time. The king met the hermit and asked 몮What are you?몯 The hermit answered 몮I am a monk.몯 Then the king asked 몮What do you practice?몯 He answered 몮I am a preacher of patience.몯  몮The king had him flogged with scourges of thorns and had his hands and feet cut off, he felt not the slightest anger.몯 Although his hands and feet were cut off he did not feel any anger towards that king.
   When the king left the hermit, a general came and asked him to get angry with the king. 몮Please hate the king. Please get angry with the king, so he will not suffer such painful consequences.몯 The hermit said 몮People like me do not hate. People like me do not get angry.몯 That is what he said.
   The next one is about C|?a-Dhammap?la. The Bodhisatta was a child in this story. He was killed by his own father.
   The next J?taka is about an elephant. The Bodhisatta was reborn as an elephant at that time. 
     몮The elephant, when struck by the stout shaft,
       Addressed the hunter with no hate in mind:
       몬What is your aim? What is the reason why
       You kill me thus? What can your purpose be?몯  
Actually what the elephant said was: 몮Whose order was this?, Whose order is this?몯, not 몬what can your purpose be?몭 The elephant asked who had ordered him to be killed.
   The hunter had been ordered by the queen to kill the elephant because the elephant had a tusk. It is said that the tusk had six kinds of rays, rays of six colors. That is why the elephant was called 몬Chaddanta몭. 몬Cha몭 means six. 몬Danta몭 means tusk. It is not six tusks but six-colored tusks. Although the elephant could easily kill the hunter, he did not. He practiced patience or forbearance.
   The next J?taka is about a great monkey. The Bodhisatta was born as a great monkey at that time. The great monkey saved a man from a rocky chasm, a rocky pit. The man could not get out of the pit by himself. So the monkey saved him. After saving him the monkey was tired. So he said to the man 몮Let me rest a little and put my head on your lap.몯 While he was resting the man thought:
     몮Now this is food for human kind
       Like other forest animals
       So why then should a hungry man
       Not kill the ape to eat?
       I몭ll travel independently (Actually it is I몭ll travel satiated.)
       Taking his meat as a provision;
       Thus I shall cross the waste, and that
       Will furnish my viatcum.몯
So he struck the great monkey with a big rock, but the monkey was not killed. His head was broken. So he climbed up a tree and said 몮You are a very ungrateful person. As I am a Bodhisatta, I will not hurt you. I will not kill you. I will even show you the way out of this wilderness.몯 The monkey jumped from tree to tree. The blood from his head dropped to the earth. Following those drops of blood the man was able to get out of the waste or wilderness.
   The next J?taka is about a serpent king. The Bodhisatta was reborn as a serpent in this Sutta. He had power but he did not use his power to kill his tormentors. This is B|ridatta.
   The next is another serpent. In another life Buddha was reborn as a serpent. It is the same thing.
  In paragraph 34 the Bodhisatta was reborn as the roya n?ga, Sa~khap?la. It is a royal n?ga again. So the Buddha was reborn as a snake for many lives. 
   There are some people who find it difficult to accept that a person could die here and be reborn as a snake. They find it hard to believe that a human being could die and be reborn as a snake or an an animal because they are thinking of evolution. It is not evolution. It is just that a person dies here and is reborn there as a result of his kamma. It is possible.
   The other day I was reading a book about past lives. In that book the author said he regressed patients back to former lives. He was asking one patient what did you see then. So in one life the patient said 몮I am a dog now.몯 So he remembered his past life as a dog or a wolf there. It was reported in that book.
   In Myanmar there was a monk who said that he had been a snake. As a snake he ate eggs. One day when he was looking for an egg, a man saw him and killed him with a spear. The snake did not die quickly. He was put on a heap of rubbish and left to die. He died and was reborn as the son of that man. When he grew up, he could remember his past life as a snake. He remembered how he had suffered before he died after he was struck by the spear. He was so apprehensive, he was so afraid of suffering that he became a monk so that he might not be reborn as a snake again.
   Such things can happen. You can find people that have been animals in their past lives. Some may not want to tell you or some just don몭t remember. There are people who have been reborn as animals and remember those lives.
   There are so many stories. The next one is M?tuposaka. Here it is an elephant. 몮Now it is in the highest degree improper and unbecoming to you to arouse thoughts of resentment, since you are emulating as your Master that Blessed One. The P??i word means that you are pointing to him as your Master. You are referring to him as your Master. It is not 몬emulating몭.You are claiming the Buddha is your Master. So we should review the qualities of the Master몭s former conduct.
   몮He should review the Suttas that deal with the beginninglessness [of the round of rebirths].몯 Beings have lives in the past and they will have lives in the future. This series of lives is called 몬the round of rebirth몭. Nobody knows or nobobody can tell when this round of rebirth begins. That is why the round of rebirth is called 몬beginningless몭. There is no beginning although we know there is a middle. We are in the middle of this round of rebirths. There will be many more rebirths and there have been millions of rebirths in the past. We do not know the beginning of it or the beginning of it cannot be known.
   In this beginingless round of rebirths the person with whom you are angry has been your father, your mother, your brother, your sister and so on. So Buddha said it is very difficult in this sa?s?ra to find a person who has not been your father, your mother and so on. So that person with whom you are angry might have been your father or your mother in your past life. So it is not proper to be angry with him.
   The reference is given as S., 2, 189-190. That is the Sa?yutta Nik?ya. The Sa?yutta Nik?ya is translated as Kindred Sayings. So in the English translation it is in Kindred Sayings, volume 2, page 128. These references in the book are for the P??i Texts.
   The next method is to review the advantages of loving-kindness. There are eleven advantages to be gained from the practice of loving-kindness. They will be explained in detail towards the end of the chapter. So if you are angry and do not practice loving-kindness, you will not get these advantages.
   The next one is the resolution into elements. You resolve that person into elements. 몮Now you who have gone forth into homelessness, when you are angry with him, what is it you are angry with? Is it head hairs you are angry with? Or body hairs? Or nails? Or teeth? Or skin?몯 and so on. So you ask yourself are you angry with head hairs and so on. That is the resolution into elements.
   I always say cut him into pieces. If you are familiar with the teaching of aggregates, you may say 몮Am I angry with material aggregate, or consciousnesss aggregate, or formation aggregate?몯 and so on.
   The last one is to try the giving of a gift. So when you are angry with a person, give him a gift. 몮It can either be given by himself to the other or accepted by himself from the other.몯 You may accept a gift given by him for you or you may give him a gift. You may give him a present. That is because when a person accepts a present, the mind becomes soft. So you may be able to get rid of resentment in this way.
   A story is given here. 몮As happened to the senior elder who received a bowl given to him at the Cittapabbata Monastery by an almsfood-eater elder who had been three times made to move from his lodgingby him, and who presented it with these words 몬Venerable sir, this bowl worth eight ducats was given by my mother who is a lay devotee, and it is rightly obtained몭, let the good lay devotee acquire merit몭.몯 The other monk maybe was a resentful monk. He made the other monk give up his lodging three times.
   You know when you are living in a monastery which is the property of the Sa~gha, you are given a place to live. It may be a small room. But if a monk comes who is senior to you and there are no other places to give to him, then you have to give your place to that monk. That is because he is senior to you, he is older than you.
   So that monk went there and got his place three times, I think out of malice. So the other monk donated a bowl to him saying 몮This bowl worth eight ducats was given to me by my mother who is a lay devotee몯 and so on.
     몮A gift for taming the untamed
       A gift for every kind of good.몯
Giving accomplishes everything. That is what is said here. By giving you can do anything. It is something like that.
   We should not apply this wrongly. Especially in our countries in Asia we say 몮Giving accomplishes everything. So give him a bribe.몯 Once a car was stopped by a policeman in this country. The grandchild was driving and her grandmother was with her. The grandmother said 몮Give him some pocket-money or give him a bribe.몯 Then the girl said 몮Grandmother, it is not Myanmar. We cannot do that here.몯
   Now we have the breaking down of barriers. 몮When his resentment towards that hostile person has been allayed, then he can turn his mind with loving-kindness towards that person too, just as towards one who is dear몯 and so on. After reflecting in different ways, then you will be able to get rid of resentment. Then you practice towards him too until the barriers are broken. 
   몮The characteristic of it is this.몯 I think - can you say 몬indication of this몭? That means you may judge from this when the barriers are broken and when they are not. The P??i word is 몬lakkha?a몭. 몬Lakkha?a몭 is usually translated as characteristic. Sometimes it may be translated differently. I think 몬indication몭 is better here. 몮The indication of it is this.몯
   Then there is a story about four persons. The robbers come and ask to give one person for sacrifice. If you can yourself or any other person, you have not broken down the barriers. Only when you cannot give anyone are the barriers broken. If you say 몮Take me to be killed. Do not take them.몯, then you are not impartial. You want your own destruction. That is partiality towards others. So you have not broken the barriers if you say that. The barriers are only broken when you say 몮Do not take any person.몯 You see the other three persons as yourself. You do not find anybody to be given for the sacrifice. Only then are the barriers broken. That means you see these four kinds of persons equally, imparitally. When the barriers are broken, you are said to gain the sign and access. Here there is no special gaining of access concentration, but when the barriers are broken, you are said to gain access concentration. After you have access concentration, you go on until you get jh?na. 몮At this point he has attained the first jh?na which abandons  five factors몯 and so on.
   Then we have the Texts and the Commentary. In the explanation of the words and how to practice meditation the practice of mett? meditation is given according to what is taught in the Pa?isambhid?magga. That is the 528 ways of practicing mett?. Please look at the handout today. This is how we practice mett? in 528 ways. If you look at the first column there are twelve kinds of persons to whom we send thoughts of loving-kindness. In the second column are the ten directions - the four cardinal directions, the four corners, and down and up. In the third column are the four modes of loving-kindness - May they be free from enmity. May they be free from displeasure. May they be free from affliction. May they live happily or keep themselves happily. In these four ways we practice towards persons. We can practice mett? following this chart in 528 ways.
   If you look at column one, there should be some space between #5 and #6. The first five are called 몬non-specific pervasion몭. From #6 through #12 there is specific pervasion. When we say all beings, we mean all beings. 몬All breathing things몭 means all beings. 몬All creatures몭 means all beings. 몬All persons몭 means all beings. 몬All those who have personality몭 means all beings. The first five mean all beings without specification. Then for #6 we say 몮may all women몯, so in that case no men are specified. Then we say 몮may all men몯 and no women are specified.
   When we practice loving-kindness meditation, we combine these three columns in different ways. First we say 몮May all beings be free from enmity, free from displeasure, free from affliction and live happily.몯 Then we say 몮May all breathing things be free from enmity, free from displeasure, free from affliction and live happily몯 and so on. Then we come to #12. 몮May all beings in states of loss be free from enmity, free from displeasure, free from affliction and live happily.몯
   Next we combine it with directions. In P??i the word for direction comes first, but in English it comes later. So it is a little strange. So you say 몮May all beings in the eastern direction be free from enmity, free from displeasure, free from affliction and live happily.몯 May all breathing things, may allcreatures, may all persons and so on in the eastern direction be free from enmity and so on.
   Following this you practice toward 48 in non-specific mode and 480 in the specific mode. So in this way there are 528 ways of practicing mett?. We have practiced this a number of times in this country. It takes about 45 or 50 minutes to practice all 528.
   In paragraph 53 there is the explanation of the word 몬satta몭. A being is called 몬satta몭 because 몮any craving for it, has held (satta) it, has gripped (visatta) it, that is why 몬a being (satta)몭 is said.몯 A being is called a 몬satta몭 because he is attached to his life.
   몮But in ordinary speech this term of common usage is applied also to those who are without greed, just as the term of common usage 몬palm fan (t?lavanta)몭 is used for different sorts of fans [in general] even if made of split bamboo.몯 A being is called 몬satta몭. Why is he called 몬satta몭? Because he has attachment to things. What about calling an Arahant a 몬satta몭? An Arahant is also called a being. An Arahant is a person who has eradicated all mental defilements. He has no attachment at all. Still he is called a 몬satta몭. The Commentator explains 몮In ordinary speech this term of common usage is applied also to those who are without greed.몯 Although literally 몬satta몭 means a person who has attachment, it is applied both to beings who have attachment and those who do not have attachment.
   The author points out the P??i word 몬t?lavanta몭 as an example. 몬T?lavanta몭 means a fan made of palm leaves. This word is used for other fans as well whether they are made of palm leaves or not. Now they are made of paper or split bamboo, but still they are called 몬t?lavanta몭 in P??i. In the same way a person who has attachment is called 몬satta몭 and a person who does not have attachment is called 몬satta몭.
   Can you give me some examples in English? You know what is meant here? There is a town called 29 Palms near Palm Springs. There may be more than 29 palms now or less than 29 palms, but the city is still called 29 Palms.
   I looked up the word 몬pen몭 in the dictionary. What is the original meaning of the word 몬pen몭? It comes from French and Latin. The original meaning is feather. So at first pens were made of feathers or quills. Now pens are not made of feathers or quills but we still call them 몬pens몭. So it is usage.
   In paragraph 54 there is an interesting word, 몬puggala몭. 몮 몬Pum몭 is what hell is called.몯 Actually it is 몬put몭. In Sanskrit it is 몬put몭. 몮They fall (galanti) into that, is the meaning.몯 The P??i word is puggala and the Sanskrit word is pudgala. 
   This word is interesting because it reflects a certain belief in Hinduism. According to Hinduism you will go to hell after death if you do not have offspring, if you do not have sons and daughters. If you live without having a son or a daughter, you will go to hell. That is why brahmans always point out to monks that we are the ones who are going to hell. We have no family. We have no offspring. It is a brahman belief. That is why they have to be householders for some years. Even though they want to become monks, they have to be householders for some years and have a family. Then they can leave the family. So those who have no sons or daughters will go to hell. 몬Puggala몭 means those who are going to hell, such persons. But later on 몬puggala몭 came to be applied to every being.
   The word for son in P??i is 몬putta몭 and in Sanskrit it is 몬putra몭. 몬Tra몭 means to protect. 몬Putra몭 means a person who protects you from hell because when you have a son, you won몭t go to hell. You are protected from hell. So a son is the person who protects you from going to hell. He is called 몬putra몭.
Student: That is the same word as in S?riputta?
Teacher: That몭s right. Later on it just meant a son. This is a Hindu belief, but the word was used by Hindus as well as Buddhists. I think the others you can read by yourselves. For next week read until the end of the first immaterial jh?na.

                                     S?dhu!           S?dhu!               S?dhu!

                                       (Tape 22 / Ps: 55 멨 124)

   I thought that I had finished loving-kindness, but I think that I will go back a little. When you practice loving-kindness, first you try to see the danger in anger or in hate and also you try to see the advantages in patience. Then you practice loving-kindness first towards yourself, later towards a person who is dear, then towards a neutral person, and lastly towards an enemy. When you are able to break down the barriers - that means when you have mental impartiality towards these four kinds of persons, you are said to have broken the barriers. With the breaking of barriers comes access concentration. In other kinds of meditation we can say at this point you get the learning sign and at another point you get the counterpart sign. But here there is no separate learning sign and counterpart sign. There is no special sign. When you have broken the barriers, you are said to have obtained the counterpart sign. At that moment you also obtain the access concentration. Then you dwell on the beings and cultivate further so that you obtain jh?na. With mett? one can get up to the third jh?na with the fourfold method and the fourth jh?na in the fivefold method.
   Then we have the Texts and Commentary beginning with paragraph 44. The Text given here is a stock-phrase Text  found in many Suttas and also in Abhidhamma. The references given here are from Vibha~ga which is in Abhidhamma and D?gha Nik?ya which is in Sutta Pi?aka. In Sutta Pi?aka and Abhidhamma Pi?aka you find this passage again and again whenever loving-kindness meditation is described.
   Then there is the explanation of the words. In paragraph 47 about the middle 몮Just as to oneself; equality with oneself without making the distinction 몬This is another being몭, is what is meant. Or alternatively equally (sabbattat?ya),with the whole state of mind; not reserving even a little, is what is meant.몯 What it really means here is not being distracted outside even a little. So with the whole state of mind you practice loving-kindness meditation, not to be distracted outside even a little.
   Then in about the middle of paragraph 48 몮measureless through familiarity and through having measureless beings as its object몯 - so it is called 몬measureless몭 because it is practiced again and again. So you are very familiar with that meditation, that kind of jh?na. Or it can mean it is measureless through having measureless beings as its object. Since its object is measureless, it is also called 몬measureless몭.
Student: In paragraph 48 it says 몮endued with loving-kindness몯. Is 몬endued몭 right or do they mean 몬embued몭?
Teacher: Endued with loving-kindness.
Student: Shouldn몭t it be 몬embued몭?
Teacher: Endued, yes. I think they mean the same thing. It means endowed with or embued with.
   Then there is the description of the 528 modes of loving-kindness. That was explained last week.
   In paragraph 53 there is the explanation of the word 몬being (satta)몭. 몮They are held (satta), gripped (visatta) by desire.몯 The P??i word is just to be attached. 몬Visatta몭 means very attached to by way of desire. So they are called 몬satta몭 in P??i. Those who have no greed are also called 몬satta몭 because it is the common term or usage for beings actually.
   The example given here is t?lavanta in P??i. 몬T?lavanta몭 means palm fan, a fan made of palm leaves. Later on anything which is used to fan is called a 몬t?lavanta몭 whether it is made with palm leaves or whatever. The same name is applied to that thing.
   Last time I pointed out the word 몬pen몭 in English. 몬Pen몭 really means a feather. Even though it may not be a feather, still it is called 몬pen몭.
   Do you see the word 몬akkhara-cintaka몭? 몮However, [in the world] etymologists (akkhara-cintaka) who do not consider meaning have it that it is a mere name.몯 몬Akkhara몭 means letters and 몬cintaka몭 means fingers, so the fingers of letters. That means grammarians or etymologists. There are two kinds of etymologists here. One kind of etymologist did not search for the meaning of the word, the literal meaning of the word. They said it is just a name given to the being. So don몭t worry whether it means to be attached to or whatever. So it is a mere name for them. 몮While those who consider meaning몯 - there are other kinds of etymologists who said it has a meaning. They said that the word comes from 몬sattva몭 in Sanskrit. A being is called 몬sattva몭 because it has a bright principle, 몬sattva몭. This refers to the teaching of the Samkhya system in Indian philosophy. Samkhya system teaches that there are three principles - the sattva, rajas and tamas. They are given in footnote 6. 
   I think that I talked about 몬puggala몭 last time. 몬Put몭 means hell and 몬gala몭 means to fall, so falling to hell. Those who fall to hell are puggala. The Hindu belief is that you go to hell if you do not have any offspring.
   In footnote 7 몮Here when the aggregates are not fully understood, there is naming (abhid?na) of them and of the consciousness몯 - I think 몬of the몭 should go. 몮There is naming of them and consciousness of them as self (att?).몯 That means we do not understand the real nature of them as aggregates, we call or give a name to these aggregates, self (att?). We understand it as att?. So 몬consciousness몭 here really means understanding. We know or understand these aggregates as att?. 몮That is to say, the physical body or alternatively the five aggregates.몯 The Sub-Commentary is explaining the word 몬att?bh?va몭. You can find the word in paragraph 54. Personality (att?bh?va) is explained here. 몬Att?몭 means att? and bh?va몭 means something arising from it. 몬Something몭 here means the naming and knowing. Naming and knowing arise from it. Therefore it is called 몬bh?va몭. How naming and how knowing? Knowing as att?. So that is called 몬att?bh?va몭 in P??i or in Sanskrit.
   In paragraph 56 몮And here may all beings be free from enmity is one absorption.몯 The Sub-Commentary also said something about absorption or jh?na here. The word used is appan?. Appan? is normally translated as absorption or jh?na. But I think if we translate it as something like application, it makes more sense.
   When we practice loving-kindness meditation, we practice in four ways. May all beings be free from enmity, that is one. May all beings be free from affliction, that is the second one. May all beings be free from anxiety, that is the third one. May they live happily, that is the fourth one. Each one is an application.
   The Sub-Commentary explains that you can get jh?na just by saying this one sentence - 몮May all beings be free from enmity. May all beings be free from enmity. May all beings be free from enmity.몯 This is called 몬one absorption몭 or 몬one application몭.
   In the explanation of these 몬free from affliction몭 means free from mental affliction. 몬Free from anxiety몭 I think is not an accurate translation. The P??i word is anigha. That means free from dukkha. You may have noticed on the sheet I gave you last week that I changed them. The second application is translated as 몮May all beings be free from displeasure.몯 The third application is translated as 몮may all beings be free from affliction.몯 몬Free from affliction몭 means free from bodily suffering, free from pain. 몬Free from displeasure몭 means free from domanassa or mental affliction. The fourth one is 몮May they live happily.몯 Literally it means may they hold themselves happily or may they maintain their bodies or themselves happily. It is all right if we just say 몮May they live happily.몯 So there are four absorptions, four applications. 
   Then there are eleven benefits to be enjoyed from the practice of loving-kindness meditation. One sleeps in comfort, one wakes up in comfort and so on.
   In paragraph 71 references are given for 몮like fire in the case of the lay woman devotee Uttar?몯. You are referred to chapter 12, paragraph 34. You will come to that later, not now, not today. On  몬Dha몭 refers to the Commentary the Dhammapada. If you want to read the story in more detail you may read the book Buddhist Legends, part 3, page 103. 몮Like the poison in the case of the Sa?yutta Reciter the Elder C|?a-S?va몯 - we don몭t know this story because the Sub-Commentary did not explain this. Maybe it was very well-known at the time this Commentary was written down. But now nobody knows about this Elder C|?a-S?va. 몮Like the knife in the case of the novice Sa~kicca몯 - this also is in the Commentary to the Dhammapada. You may read the same book Buddhist Legends, part 2, page 238 and the following pages.
   Now we go to compassion. Compassion is karu?? in P??i. It will be explained later. 몮One who wants to develop compassion should begin his task by reviewing the danger in lack of compassion and the advantage in compassion.몯 Then he practices compassion.
   Compassion takes beings in suffering or beings in distress as object. So it is a little different than the object of loving-kindness meditation. Loving-kindness meditation takes all beings whether they are suffering or whether they are enjoying, so all beings. Karu?? takes all beings who are in distress, who are suffering.
   When we want to practice karu?? meditation, we have to find a person who is in distress, who is suffering, mentally as well as physically. So we have to find such a person. If we cannot find such a person, what should we do?  Then we can arouse compassion for an evil-doing person. There may be some person doing evil. Even though he is happy right now, he is going to suffer in his next lives. So he is the object of compassion also. We can practice to such a person.
Student: Bhante, were people so happy at that time they could not find a person in suffering?
Teacher: They may be having fun right now doing evil things, but they are going to suffer the consequences of wrong doing in the next life. You can think of that and take them as the object of karu??.
   Then the comparison is given to a man who is caught with stolen goods and who is condemned to death. He is given food and all these things, but he was not happy. In that story in paragraph 79 it says 몮giving him a hundred blows in sets of four.몯 Actually it is not in sets of four, but at every crossroads. A crossroads is called 몬a set of four몭 because four roads meet there. So at every crossroads he was given a hundred blows. The people give him things to eat. Although he may be eating and although he may even be enjoying it, he is going to suffer death. In the same way a person who is doing evil may be enjoying himself now, but he will suffer. So he can be the object of karu??.
   Then there may be some person who does not do evil, who does profitable deeds, but he may be overtaken by one of the kinds of ruin beginning with the ruin of health, or ruin of relatives, or ruin of property and so on. That person also can be the object of karu?? meditation. A person who does not do evil things but who does meritorious deeds, good things, may be in poor health, or may have disease, or may have lost relatives, or may have lost his property and so on. So he can be the object of karu??. 
   In paragraph 81 the second paragraph it says 몮And here too몯. The 몬too몭 is misplaced. That should go after 몮He too deserves the meditator몭s compassion.몯 Not only the person who does evil, but he also deserves compassion. 몮He too deserves the meditator몭s compassion.
   몮Even with no such ruin, thus 몬In reality he is unhappy몭.몯 Now there is a person who does good. He has not been overtaken by any one of the ruins. So he is well off. He is in prosperity. What do you do with him? You can still practice karu?? towards him. 몮 몬In reality he is unhappy몭, because he is not exempt from suffering of the round [of becoming].몯 He is not exempt from suffering old age, disease and death in the end. And so such a person can be the object of karu?? meditation.
   So in fact anybody can be the object of karu?? meditation, depending on how you regard that person, how you look at him. But it is better to find a person who is in real distress, who is in real suffering and practice karu?? towards that person. If you cannot find such a person, then you may practice towards the other persons.
   Here also there is the breaking down of barriers. Then one practices meditation until one gets jh?na. This meditation can also lead to the attainment of third jh?na or fourth jh?na.
   The next one is gladness (mudit?). Since it is gladness, its object must be people who are in prosperity, who are in happiness. Beings who are in happiness are the objects of mudit? meditation. You practice this towards a dear person and so on. 
   In paragraph 85 it says 몬a boon companion몭. What is 몬a boon companion몭?  The P??i word is so??sahaya. 몬So??a몭 means a tavern, a drinking place. So??sahaya means a drinking companion. That means a very intimate and very kind relationship towards that person. Do you use this word 몬boon companion몭?
Student: I don몭t think so. 몬Boon몭 is something like lucky or a gift. In French there is 몬bon vivant몭 which is a high liver or a drinker. That몭s French though. Actually a drinking companion makes a lot of sense.
Teacher: When you practice compassion, what you do is to reflect 몮This being indeed has been reduced to misery. If only he could be free from this suffering.몯 That is how you practice compassion. That is in paragraph 78. When you practice karu??, you say 몮May he be free from suffering. May he get free from this suffering.몯 That is the way of practicing compassion towards beings.
   In mudit? what do you say? 몮This being is indeed glad. How good! How excellent!몯 That is mudit?. So when you practice mudit?, you say 몮He is happy. He is in prosperity. How good! How excellent!몯 That is how you practice mudit? meditation. When you want to practice mudit? meditation, you choose a person who is in happiness, who is in prosperity. Then you say 몮He is happy. He is prosperous. How good! How excellent!몯 You practice like that.
   몮But if his boon companion or the dear person was happy in the past but is now unlucky and unfortunate, then gladness can still be aroused by remembering his past happiness.몯 Or 몮In the future he will again enjoy similar success몯 and so on. You can still practice mudit? towards that person.
   Then the is breaking down of the barriers and so on. This meditation also leads to third jh?na or fourth jh?na.
   The last one is upekkh? (equanimity). 몮One who wants to develop equanimity must have already obtained the triple or quadruple jh?na in loving-kindness, and so on.몯 That is if you want to attain jh?na through this meditation. First you must attain three jh?nas or four jh?nas by the practice of loving-kindness, or compassion or gladness. 
   몮He should emerge from the third jh?na [in the fourfold reckoning], after he has made it familiar, and he should see danger in the former [three divine abidings] because they are linked with attention given to being몭s enjoyment (or given to attachment to beings) in the way beginning 몬May they be happy몭 and so on.몯
   몮Because resentment and approval are near, and because their association with joy is gross몯 - actually because they are gross due to association with joy. It is not that association with joy is gross, but they are gross. They are said to be gross because they are associated with joy. There is sukha with them. So they are said to be gross. 몮And he should also see the advantage in equanimity because it is peaceful.몯
   How do you practice equanimity towards people? What do you say? It is not given here. We will meet it later. You just say 몮Beings have kamma as their property.몯 Just that. It is kamma. Beings suffer or enjoy according to their kamma. Beings have kamma as their property, as their matrix, as their relative and so on. Thinking of the law of Kamma is one way of practicing upekkh? meditation.
   몮Therefore he should arouse equanimity towards the neutral person in the way already stated. Then through the neutral one몯 - I think 몬through the neutral one몭 should go. It should be 몮Then he should break down the barriers in each case between the three people, that is, the dear person, then the boon companion, and then the hostile one, and lastly himself. And he should cultivate that sign, develop and repeatedly practice it.몯 Here since he has attained three jh?nas or four jh?nas with mett? meditation and others, he reaches here the fourth jh?na or the fifth jh?na.
   몮But how then? Does this arise in one whom the third jh?na has already arisen on the basis of the earth kasi?a, etc.? It does not.몯 Not anybody who has gained jh?na with other meditation can obtain the fourth jh?na or the fifth jh?na through upekkh?. He has to have gained jh?nas through mett?, karu?? or mudit? meditation. Then he can gain the fourth jh?na or the fifth jh?na through the last one, through upekkh? meditation.
   몮Does this arise in one whom the third jh?na has already arisen on the basis of the earth, etc.? It does not. Why not? Because of the dissimilarity of the object.몯 Let us say you get the first, second, third jh?na taking the earth kasi?a, the earth disk as object. Then the object of your jh?na is the earth disk. Here the object of your jh?na must be beings. So there is difference of object. 몮Because of the dissimilarity of the object. It arises only in one in whom the third jh?na has arisen on the basis of loving-kindness, etc., because the object is similar.몯 That is the end of the four divine abidings.
   Now comes the general exposition. The first part has the meanings of mett?, karu??, mudit? and upekkh?. 몮Now as to the meaning firstly of loving-kindness, compassion, gladness and equanimity: it fattens, thus it is loving-kindness.몯 The P??i word 몬mejjati몭 really means it sticks. So it is sticky.
   몮It is gluttonous (not solvent).몯 When you have mett?, you are as it were glued to the person. 몮It is gluttonous is the meaning.몯 , not solvent.
   몮Also: it comes about with respect to a friend (mitta), or it is behaviour towards a friend, thus it is loving-kindness (mett?).몯 The first explanation takes it that mett? comes from the root 몬mit몭 and the suffix 몬t?몭. The second one takes it that the word 몬mett?몭 comes from the word 몬mitta몭. Mitta is changed to mett? by a grammatical rule. So mett? first is derived from a root and a suffix and secondly is derived from a word and a suffix.
   The second one is karu??. It is explained here. 몮When there is suffering in others it causes (karoti) good people몭s hearts to be moved (kampana), thus it is compassion (karu??). Or alternatively, it combats (ki?ati) others몭 suffering, attacks and demolishes it, thus it is compassion.몯 Here whether you really demolish the suffering of others is not important. It is immaterial. When karu?? arises in one몭s mind, it arises in this manner. It arises in this mode of wanting to remove suffering from others. 
   몮Or alternatively, it is scattered (kiriyati) upon those who suffer, it is extended to them by pervasion, thus it is compassion (karu??).몯 It is the desire for beings to be free from suffering, to be free from distress. 
   The next one is mudit?. 몮Those endowed with it are glad (modanti), or itself is glad (modati), or it is the mere act of being glad (modana), thus it is gladness (mudit?).몯 Mudit? is just defined as gladness.
   Next there is upekkh?. 몮It looks on at (upekkhati), abandoning such interestedness as thinking 몬May they be free from enmity몭 and having recourse to neutrality, thus it is equanimity (upekkh?).몯 Equanimity is not indifference. It takes beings as object. It is just impartiality. It is not disregarding them all together. 
   Then there is discussion of the characteristics etc. of each one. 몮Loving-kindness is characterized here as promoting the aspect of welfare.몯 That means actually occurring in the mode of desiring welfare. 몮Its function is to prefer welfare. It is manifested as the removal of annoyance.몯 I just want to say 몬ill will몭 here. Its proximate cause is seeing lovableness in beings. It succeeds when it makes ill will subside, and it fails when it provides (selfish) affection.몯 몬Selfish몭 is put in parentheses. Is there unselfish affection? Here what is meant is attachment. If you have attachment or lobha, you fail.
   Compassion actually is desire to remove suffering from others. 몮Compassion is characterized as promoting the aspect of allaying suffering. Its function resides in not bearing other몭s suffering. It is manifested as non-cruelty. Its proximate cause is to see helplessness in those overwhelmed by suffering. It succeeds when it makes cruelty subside and it fails when it produces sorrow.몯 This is very important. 몮It fails when it produces sorrow.몯 When you practice compassion, you just practice compassion and you don몭t go into feeling sorry. That is very important. 
   When we see some people injured by some person for example, we are not only sorry for them, but we may be angry with the person who inflicted pain on them. When we do that, we are going beyond the scope of compassion. We are getting into akusala, unwholesome mental states. Compassion is a wholesome mental state, a highly developed wholesome mental state. When we practice compassion, we just have the desire for them to be free from suffering. We cannot say that we suffer with them because if we suffer with them, we have unwholesome mental states in our mind. We do not suffer with them. We have compassion for them. We sympathize with them. That is important in karu??. Many people confuse karu?? with this enemy, sorrow.
   몮Gladness is characterized as gladness (produced by other몭s success). Its function resides in being unenvious. It is manifested as the elimination of aversion (boredom).몯 We were talking about aversion and boredom on my way here. The P??i word used is 몬arati몭. 몬Rati몭 means delight and 몬a몭 means not. So it is non-delight in other people몭s, other beings몭 success etc. I don몭t think that we can call it boredom. Perhaps aversion also is not so good here. Can you think of another word which means non-delight?  Mudit? is the opposite of envy actually. When you envy somebody, you are not pleased with his success or his prosperity. You don몭t take delight in his success. The word 몬arati몭 here means that, not taking delight in other people몭s success and so on. 몮it succeeds when it makes non-delight subside, and it fails when it produces merriment.몯 That is merriment with attachment.
Student: Sometimes you say sympathetic joy for gladness?
Teacher: Yes. Sympathetic joy and some also translate it as altruistic joy. Sympathetic joy may be better because 몬gladness몭 can mean any kind of gladness. Maybe here the translator wanted to be literal. 몬Mudit?몭 just means gladness, but I think sympathetic joy is a better word for it.
   몮Equanimity is characterized as promoting the aspect of neutrality towards beings몯 and so on. 몮Its proximate cause is seeing ownership of deeds (kamma) thus: 몬Beings are owners of their deeds. Whose [if not theirs] is the choice by which they will become happy, or will get free from suffering, or will not fall away  from the success they have reached?몯 몬Will get free from suffering몭 refers to karu?? (compassion). 몬Will not fall away from the success they have reached몭 refers to mudit?. When you practice mudit?, you may say 몮May they not fall away from this prosperity, or this success, or this happiness.몯 You can say like that too. On the other page it said you may say 몮This being is indeed glad. How good! How excellent!몯 You can say either way.
   몮It succeeds when it makes resentment and approval subside (Resentment is dosa and approval is lobha.), and it fails when it produces the equanimity of unknowing.몯 몬The equanimity of unknowing몭 is the indifference of ignorance or just ignorance.
   몮The general purpose of these four divine abidings is the bliss of insight and an excellent (form of future) existence. That peculiar to each is respectively the warding  off of ill will and so on.몯 This paragraph is not difficult to understand.
   The next paragraph is the near and far enemies. Each one has two kinds of enemies, the near enemy and the far enemy. 몮The divine abiding of loving-kindness has greed as its near enemy.몯 That is why it is very important when you practice loving-kindness that you do not have greed or attachment for that person. Sometimes they are very similar. So you may take one for the other. So the near enemy is greed or attachment since both share in seeing the good things, seeing virtues.
   몮Greed behaves like a foe who keeps close by a man, and it easily finds an opportunity. So loving-kindness should be well protected from it. And ill will which is dissimilar to the similar greed, is its far enemy like a foe ensconced in a rock wilderness. So loving-kindness must be practiced free from fear (free from danger) of that; for it is  not possible to practice loving-kindness and feel anger simultaneously.몯
   몮Compassion has grief based on the home life (That is feeling sorry.) as its near enemy, since both share in seeing failure.몯 Cruelty is the far enemy.
   Now sympathetic joy or gladness (mudit?) - its near enemy is joy based on the home life. That means becoming merry, joyful with attachment. 몮And aversion (boredom) - or non-delight- which is dissimilar to the similar joy, is its far enemy.몯 So something like envy is its far enemy. So gladness should be practiced free from fear or danger of that.
   몮Equanimity has the equanimity of unknowing based on the home life as its near enemy.몯 That is not knowing, ignorance. It is ignorance that is not accompanied by pleasurable feeling or displeasurable feeling. So this ignorance is accompanied by indifferent feeling and shares in ignoring faults and virtues.
   몮And greed and resentment, which are dissimilar to the similar unknowing are its far enemies.몯 Its far enemies are greed and resentment. 몮Therefore equanimity must be practiced free from fear of that.몯
   Each of these has two enemies, the near enemy and the far enemy. We should be careful with both the near enemy and the far enemy. 
   몮Now zeal (chanda) consisting in desire to act is the beginning of all these things. Suppression of the hindrances, etc., is the middle. Absorption is the end.몯 So jh?na is the end.
   몮Their object is a single living being or many living beings, as a mental object consisting in a concept.몯 Because beings are a concept it is called a 몬concept몭.
   몮The extension of the object takes place either in access or in absorption. Here is the order of it. Just as a skilled ploughman first delimits an area and then does his ploughing, so first a single dwelling should be delimited and loving-kindness developed towards all beings there in the way beginning 몬In this dwelling may all beings be free from enmity몭.몯 Then when you have gained experience with that, you may extend your range of loving-kindness by taking two dwellings, three dwellings, four dwellings and so on, until the whole village, the district, the kingdom, one direction and so on up to one world sphere, or even beyond that. You develop loving-kindness to beings in such areas. 
   That is why when I teach loving-kindness, I teach in two ways. The first is by way of person: 몮May I be well, happy and peaceful. May my teachers be well, happy and peaceful. May my parents be well, happy and peaceful.몯 and so on. The other way is: 몮May all beings in this building be well, happy and peaceful. May all beings in this area, in this city, in this county, in this state, in this country, in this world, in this universe be well, happy and peaceful.몯 And then 몮May all beings in general be well, happy and peaceful.몯 The meditation is extended little by little.
   Now the outcome, what kind of results you can get from the practice of these four divine abidings. 몮Just as the immaterial states are the outcome of the kasi?as, and the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception is the outcome of concentration, and Fruition Attainment is the outcome of insight, and the attainment of cessation is the outcome of serenity coupled with insight, so the divine abiding of equanimity is the outcome of the first three divine abidings.몯 In order to be successful in the fourth one you first have to be successful in the first three divine abidings.
   몮For just as the gable rafters cannot be placed in the air without having first set up the scaffolding and built the framework of beams, so it is not possible to develop the fourth jh?na in these without having already developed the third jh?na in them.몯 
   In paragraph 104 it says that immaterial states are the outcome of the kasi?as. 몬Kasi?a몭 really means jh?na developed on the kasi?a. You take the kasi?a as the object of meditation. Then you practice meditation and get jh?na. If you do not get r|p?vacara jh?na, then you do not get ar|p?vacara jh?nas. That is why it says the immaterial states are the outcome of the kasi?a jh?nas. 몮The base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception is the outcome of concentration.몯 The ar|p?vacara jh?na is the outcome the third ar|p?vacara jh?na concentration. 몮Fruition Attainment is the outcome of insight.몯 When you practice vipassan? meditation and become enlightened, you gain Fruition Attainment. So Fruition Attainment is the outcome of insight meditation.
   몮The attainment of cessation is the outcome of serenity coupled with insight.몯 There is an attainment called 몬cessation attainment몭. That means the cessation of mental activities. It is a very highly developed type of jh?na. In order to get into that jh?na you must first have all the eight or nine jh?nas. You enter into first jh?na and emerge from it. Then you enter into second jh?na, third jh?na and so on until you reach the fourth ar|p?vacara jh?na. After emerging from the first jh?na, you practice vipassan?. Then you enter into the second jh?na (That is samatha or serenity meditation.) and practice vipassan? on that jh?na or the factors of jh?na. So here vipassan? and samatha go in a coupled way. It is stated here as the outcome of serenity coupled with insight. The explanation of the attainment will be given at the end of the book.
   Now questions - 몮And here it may be asked: But why are loving-kindness, compassion, gladness and equanimity, called divine abidings?몯 The P??i word for divine abiding is 몬brahm? vih?ra몭. 몬Vih?ra몭 means living. Here it is translated as abiding. The word 몬brahm?몭 has two meanings here. One meaning is the best and the other meaning is faultless, so immaculate. These abidings are the best because they are the right attitude towards beings. These are the right attitudes which we should have towards beings. Therefore they are called 몬the best몭.
   몮And just as Brahm? Gods abide with immaculate minds, so the meditators who associate themselves with these abidings abide on an equal footing with Brahm? Gods.몯 The Brahmas have immaculate minds. So their minds are not contaminated by some of the mental defilements. A person who practices any one of these meditations is like a Brahm?. That is because the Brahm? Gods in the world of Brahm?s always practice these four divine abidings. They live with these four divine abidings. They have no other thing to do. So these meditations are called 몬brahm? vih?ra몭. It is the abiding like that of the brahm?s. They are called divine abidings in the sense of the best and in the sense of immaculate. They are the best way of abiding or the faultless way of abiding.
   Why are they only four? The answer that is given is that the way of purity is fourfold. 몮Loving-kindness is the way to purity for one who has much ill will, compassion is that for one who has much cruelty, gladness is that one for one who has much non-delight, and equanimity is that for one who has much greed.몯
   몮Also attention given to beings is only fourfold, that is to say, as bringing welfare, as removing suffering, as being glad at their success, and as unconcern, [that is to say, impartial neutrality.]몯 That is the second.
   몮And one abiding in the measureless states should practice loving-kindness and the rest like a mother with four sons, namely, a child, an invalid, one in the flush of youth, and one busy with his own affairs; for she wants the child to grow up, wants the invalid to get well, wants the one in the flush of youth to enjoy for long the benefits of youth, and is not at all bothered about the one who is busy with his own affairs. That is why the measureless states are only four as 몬due to paths to purity and other sets of four몭.몯
   Then the order - the order is just loving-kindness, compassion, gladness and equanimity.
   Now why are they called measureless? In paragraph 110 몮For their scope is measureless beings.몯 That means their object is beings without measure, without exception. All of them occur with a measureless scope for their scope is measureless beings. 
   몮Instead of assuming a measure such as 몬loving-kindness, etc., should be developed only towards a single being, or in an area of such an extent몭, they occur with universal pervasion.몯 What does that mean? Then when you practice loving-kindness towards a person, it cannot be called measureless? 
   The translation is a little off the mark. What is meant here or what is written by the original author is that even when you are practicing towards one person, it can be called measureless because you do not limit your loving-kindness to one part of the body.  That is what is meant here. 몮Even in regard to a single being they occur with universal pervasion without assuming a measure as 몬loving-kindness should be developed in this much part of him몭.몯 So it is not like 몮May his head be well, happy and peaceful. May the upper part of his body be well, happy and peaceful몯 and so on. You take the whole being. So even with regard to a single person it can be called measureless. That몭s what is meant here.
   The next topic is producing three jh?nas and four jh?nas. The first three can produce how many jh?nas? Three or four. The last one can produce the fourth or the fifth, only one jh?na. 
   There is a discussion here with an opponent. Beginning with paragraph 112 there is an argument and counterargument. The opponent pointed to a Sutta. He took the Sutta to mean that all four or five jh?nas can be obtained by the practice of mett?, karu?? and mudit?. The form we see in that Sutta may point to that if you are not really familiar with Abhidhamma. Buddha said that after you practice loving-kindness, you should go on making this loving-kindness with vitakka and vic?ra, then without vitakka but with vic?ra and so on. So when you read it superficially, you also may think that you can get all four or five jh?nas through mett? meditation and so on. That is not so.
   So the author said: 몮He should be told: Do not put it like that. For if that were so, then contemplation of the body, etc., would also have quadruple and quintuple jh?na.몯 The Buddha taught about contemplation of the body also in the same way, but contemplation of the body can only produce the first jh?na, not the other jh?nas.
   몮There is not even the first jh?na in the contemplation of feeling or in the other two.몯 몬Or in the other two몭 is wrong. In its place we should say 몮But there is not even the first jh?na in the contemplation of feeling, let alone the second and so on.몯 When you practice feeling contemplation, you cannot get even the first jh?na, let alone the second, third, fourth and fifth. 몮So do not misrepresent the Blessed One by adherence to the letter.몯 The he explained this.
   In paragraph 114 about five lines down it says 몮but the Blessed One had no confidence yet in that bhikkhu.몯 That was the word about which I was talking to you. Actually the Buddha scolded that monk by saying 몮So too, some misguided men merely question me and when the Dhamma is expounded [to them], they still fancy that they need not follow me.몯 So that monk asked the Buddha to teach him, and he did not practice. Then again he asked the Buddha to teach him. The Buddha saw that he had the capability to become an Arahant, so this time the Buddha taught him again. So can you give me another word like scold? 
Student: Chastise?
Teacher: Chastise, yes, very good. So the Buddha chastised him. It is not that the Buddha had no confidence in him. He misread the word. Actually it is the right word but with an accent. So the Buddha chastised the monk.
   When you read the Sutta, it seems to mean that you can practice loving-kindness meditation and then you can get first, second, third, fourth and fifth jh?nas. However what the Buddha meant there is that you practice mett? meditation and you may get the first jh?na, second jh?na or third jh?na, but do not be content with that. Try to get higher jh?nas by taking other subjects of meditation, not mett? meditation. If you want to get the fourth or fifth jh?na, you have to practice another kind of meditation, not mett? meditation. By the practice of mett? meditation you can only get the third or fourth jh?na. That is what is meant.
   In footnote 17 몮Mere unification of the mind: the kind of concentration (sam?dh?na) that is undeveloped몯 - I think that is 몬not too developed몭 is better, not 몬undeveloped몭 because it is a little developed, but not developed enough.
   Next we will go to paragraph 119, the highest limit of each. 몮And while they are twofold by way of the triple-quadruple jh?na and the single remaining jh?na, still they should be understood to be distinguishable in each case by a different efficacy consisting in having 몬beauty as the highest몭, etc., for they are so described in the Haliddavasana Sutta.몯 몬Beauty in the highest몭 is not a good translation for the word. It is liberation with the beautiful as object. Here 몬liberation몭 means jh?nas, jh?nas which take pleasant things as object. 몮So loving-kindness is the basic support for the liberation with the beautiful as object.몯
   몮One who abides in compassion has to come to know thoroughly the danger in materiality, since compassion is aroused in him when he sees suffering of beings that has as its material sign (I think 몬material sign몭 should go.) cause, form beaten with sticks, and so on.몯 몬Form몭 means a body.
   In paragraph 123 there is a lot of existent and non-existent things in that passage. What we should keep in mind is that happiness (sukha) and pain (dukkha) are said to be existent because they belong to paramattha. They belong to reality. Sukha as well as dukkha are among the mental factors. Sukha is pleasurable feeling and dukkha is displeasurable feeling. They are among the 52 mental factors or mental states. Therefore they are said to be existent things. 
   A being is non-existent according to ultimate reality or in the ultimate sense. A being is just a combination of mind and matter or a combination of the five aggregates. When we say 몬a being몭, it is non-existent. And when we say 몬sukha몭 and 몬dukkha몭, they are existent. If you keep that in mind, I think you will understand paragraph 123.
   Upekkh? is not interested in the happiness of beings or in the suffering of beings. It takes just the beings as an object, not the happiness or the suffering of beings, not the sukha or dukkha of beings. 
    A person who practices upekkh? meditation becomes skilled in taking what is non-existent, that is beings, as object. So it is easier for such a person to take the non-existent, the other kinds if non-existent things as object, that is the base, which is non-existent as to individual essence  of consciousness, which is a reality. The third ar|p?vacara jh?na (the third immaterial jh?na) takes the non-existence of the first ar|p?vacara jh?na.
   Non-existence itself is non-existent. Non-existence is a concept. It is not reality. A person who is skilled in taking concept as object when he practices upekkh? meditation will find it easy to take the non-existent or nothingness of the first ar|p?vacara consciousness when he tries to get the immaterial jh?nas.
   In order to get the third ar|p?vacara jh?na you have to take the absence of the first aru?p?vacara jh?na as object. You know that the ar|p?vacara jh?nas are the immaterial jh?nas. Most of the jh?nas that we are talking about are the material jh?nas. How to get the immaterial jh?nas will be described in the next chapter.
Student: Immaterial jh?na is formless jh?na?
Teacher: Formless jh?na, that몭s right. In order to get the third formless jh?na you have to meditate on the absence of the first formless jh?na. That absence is nothing. That is just a concept. If you are skilled in taking concept as object when you practice upekkh? meditation, then you will find it easier here to take nothingness as object. That is what is explained in paragraph 123. The sentences are long and involved, so it is not easy to understand.
   So please keep in mind that when it says 몬existent몭 here it means sukha and dukkha. And when it says 몬non-existent몭 it means beings because beings are non-existent in the ultimate sense.
  OK. The others are not difficult to understand. Footnote 20 is very good because even in the Burmese edition there is a mistake. In the Sinhalese edition the reading is right and he took the Sinhalese edition here.
   You may not understand. 몮Reading in both cases 몬avijjam?na-gahana-dakkha? citta?몯, not dukkha?. Dukkha and dakkha have two very different meanings. 몬Dakkha몭 means skill and 몬dukkha몭 means suffering. So here the correct reading should be dakkha and not dukkha. There is just the difference of an 몬a몭 and 몬u몭. He detected this. That is very good.
   By the practice of these you fulfill the ten p?ramit?s. In Therav?da Buddhism there are ten p?ramit?s to be fulfilled by Bodhisattas and any person. These p?ramit?s are mentioned in paragraph 124. 몮And to all beings they give gifts.몯 That means giving. That is the first p?ramit?. 몮And in order to avoid doing harm to beings they undertake the precepts of virtue.몯 That is the second p?ramit?. The first is d?na and the second is s?la. 몮They practice renunciation for the purpose of perfecting their virtue.몯 That is the third p?ramit?. 몮They cleanse their understanding (Pa??? that is the fourth.) for the purpose of non-confusion about what is good and bad for beings. They constantly arouse energy (viriya) having beings몭 welfare and happiness at heart. When they have acquired heroic fortitude through supreme energy, they become patient (khanti) with beings몭 many kinds of faults. They do not deceive (That means truthfulness.) when promising 몬We shall give you this; we shall do this for you.몭 They are unshakably resolute upon beings몭 welfare and happiness.몯 Resoluteness is the eighth p?ramit?. In P??i it is called 몬adhi??h?na몭, firmness or resolution. 몮Through unshakable loving-kindness (That is the ninth.) they place them first [before themselves].몯 Actually what it means is they do favor first. The P??i word is pubbak?ri. 몬Pubba몭 means first and 몬k?ri몭 means doing. 몬They do first몭 means that they do not wait for you to ask a favor, they do first. So 몮Through unshakable loving-kindness they do favor first. Through equanimity (the tenth p?ramit?) they expect no reward. Having fulfilled the [ten] perfections, these [divine abidings] then perfect all the good states classed as the ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, the six kinds of knowledge not shared [by disciples] and the eighteen states of the Enlightened One. This is how they bring to perfection all the good states beginning with giving.몯 These ten p?ramit?s can be fulfilled by the practice of these four divine abidings.
   There is so much to talk about. I intended to go to the next chapter, but I cannot. So please read chapter ten for next week.

                                       S?dhu!       S?dhu!         S?dhu!

