                      Themes of  talks from Visuddhi Magga 
Chapter One
Tape one: The meaning of the name of the book, short biography of Venerable Buddhaghosa, place of Commentaries in the Texts and Sub-Commentaries, comments on the introductory stanza from the Sa?yutta Nik?ya, discussion of virtue (s?la), its characteristic, its function, its manifestation and its proximate cause.
Paragraphs: 1-22.

Tape two: Review of first talk, benefits of virtue, the kinds of virtue, explanation of ．keeping・ and ．avoiding・, explanation of 8 precepts with livelihood as eighth, s?la with dependence as craving and dependence as wrong view, explanation of double Code, the Khandhakas, 4 adhipati, precepts for laity, Uposatha for monks, restraint of P??imokkha, restraint of sense faculties, virtue of livelihood for monks, proper and improper resorts for monks and corrections. Paragraphs: 23-52.

Tape three: Virtue of the restraint of the sense faculties is discussed with regard to not seeing ．the sign・ or ．the particulars of the object; restraint and non-restraint are explained with reference to the thought process; there is discussion of some of the P??imokkha rules relating to purity of livelihood for monks; reflections on the four requisites is discussed; why the rules cannot be changed in any way is explained; corrections, questions and answers are given. Paragraphs: 53-99.

Tape four: Discussion of restraint of sense faculties, 4 sweets and gall nuts, purification of livelihood, what is and is not allowable with regard to hinting etc., reviewing, purification by confession probation & defeat, definition of Trainers, vast number of rules for monks, minor sexuality, danger of defiled virtue, corrections, questions and answers. Paragraphs: 100-161.






                               Chapter Two

Tape five: Brief introduction to ascetic practices, discussion of the refuse-rag-wearer・s practice, the triple-robe-wearer・s practice, the alms-food-eater・s practice, the house-to-house-seeker・s practice, the one-sessioner・s practice, the bowl-food-eater・s practice, the later-food-refuser・s practice, the three grades of practice, the benefits of the practice, history dying and components of the robes, ．pure・ robes, questions, answers and corrections.
Paragraphs :1-46.

Tape six: Definitions of village, forest, precinct, differences of opinion in determining these areas, the forest-dweller・s practice, the tree-root-dweller・s practice, things to avoid, open-air-dweller・s practice, temporary shelter that is allowable, charnel-ground-dweller・s practice, cautionary advice, explanation of watches of the night, , any-bed or hut-user・s practice, sitter・s practice, discussion of supportive equipment, grades and benefits of practices, dhuta~ga according to Abhidhamma is kusala or aby?kata, difference of opinion, those who practice or do not and those who encourage or do not, dhammasen?pati, 5 states that go with volition of dhuta~ga, suitability of practice, who may practice and who may not, importance of s?la for meditation, how difficult s?la is for monks, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 47-93.

                                       Chapter Three

Tape Seven: Definition of sam?dhi, understanding sam?dhi with reference to characteristic, function, manifestation & proximate cause; discussion of access and absorption concentration; brief introduction to the 40 subjects of meditation; factors of jh?na; jh?nas by fourfold and fivefold method; practice - slow, swift, stagnated etc.; forsaking impediments; Pav?ra?? Ceremony; corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-72.

Tape Eight: Discussion of 6 temperaments, the sources of temperaments as explained in Vimutti Magga and teachers of the Commentaries, how the temperament of a person is known by posture, actions, manner of eating, by seeing, kinds of states occurring in the mind; what is suitable for the different temperaments with regard to things and meditation subjects; 40 subjects of meditation, subjects which bring access and absorption concentration, what jh?nas may or may not be developed by the subjects of meditation, surmounting factors and objects, expansion of kasi?as, karav?ka bird, objects which should not or cannot be extended, objects with and without counterpart signs, mobile and immobile objects; objects by sight, touch and hearsay; abhi???, conditions for higher states of meditation; dedicating oneself to the Buddha, corrections.
Paragraphs: 74-132.

                                 Chapter Four

Tape Nine: Brief review, 18 faults of a monastery, 5 favorable qualities of a monastery, severing lesser impediments, the earth kasi?a meditation in detail, memorized sign and counterpart sign, access and jh?na concentration, avoiding 7 unsuitable things, balancing the faculties, when it is permissible for the faculties not to be balanced, questions and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-73.

Tape Ten: Brief account of the arising of first jh?na, detailed account of the arising of first jh?na, reduced number of k?m?vacara javanas in the jh?na thought process, other opinion of Elder Godatta, explanation of phrases ．quite secluded from k?mas・ and ．(quite) secluded from akusalas・, explanation of k?madh?tu, discussion of vitakka and vic?ra, 5 kinds of p?ti, comparison of p?ti and sukha, presence of ekaggat? as jh?na factor, possession of 5 factors and abandonment of 5 factors, two meanings of the word ．jh?na・, modes of attainment, extension of sign, care with reviewing, 5 kinds of mastery, questions and corrections.
Paragraphs: 74-137. 

Tape 11: Detailed exposition on second jh?na, third jh?na and fourth jh?na; detailed explanation of set phrases describing jh?nas, why some phrases are repeated, why some factors present in earlier jh?na are first mentioned in later jh?na; ten kinds of upekkh?, explanation of feelings and at which stage each feeling is surmounted; review of the fourfold and fivefold method of jh?na and corrections.
Paragraphs: 138-202.

                                         Chapter Five

Tape 12: Nine kasi?as and how they are practiced, discussion of the word ．n?la・, resulting supernormal powers that may be gained from kasi?a practice, talk on su??a, things that prevent some from attaining jh?na.
Paragraphs: 1-42.

                                          Chapter Six

Tape 12: Introduction to meditation on foulness, the particle ．ka・, directions for contemplating on a corpse, ten kinds of corpses and the kinds of attachment they help eliminate, why only first jh?na may be gained from asubha meditation, applying characteristics of dead body to one・s own body, how to attend a funeral, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-94.

                                       Chapter Seven

Tape 13: Brief review of the ten recollections, detailed discussion of the attributes of the Buddha - 1. Araha, explanation of the destruction of the spokes of becoming, explanation of the destruction of kamma, 2. Samm?sambuddha, 3. Vijj? - Cara?a, 4. Sugata, detailed exposition on speaking rightly, 5. Lokavid|, discussion of Buddhist cosmology, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-44.



Tape 14: Incomparable leader of men to be tamed, reflections after enlightenment, beings tamed by the Buddha, Kesi the horse-trainer, animals unable to gain enlightenment, the frog Ma??|ka, ．buddha・, bhagav?, 4 kinds of names, grammatical word play, , benefits of Recollection of the Buddha, no jh?na, the Recollection of the Dhamma, teaching is lovely in meaning and in words, ．visible here and now・, ak?lika, Recollection of the Sa~gha, 8 Persons and 4 Pairs, dakkhi?a, corrections.
Paragraphs: 45-100.

Tape 15: Recollection of virtue, untorn unrent unblotched unmottled s?la, importance of s?la for meditation, recollection of generosity, benefits of generosity, recollection of deities, the celestial realms, resemblance of one・s own good qualities to that of the deities, joy of recollection meditation as basis for vipassan? and enlightenment, corrections.
Paragraphs 101-128.

                                   Chapter Eight

Tape 15: Recollection of death, kinds of death, timely and untimely death, the sage who practiced patience, 8 ways to recollect death, this recollection must be done wisely, reflection on death can reduce attachment and pride, corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-35.

Tape 16: Discussion of the divisions of pa??atti according to the Texts, Commentaries, and teachers, praise of mindfulness occupied with the body, 14 sections on mindfulness of the body in Mah? Satipa??h?na Sutta, division with reference to samatha and vipassan?, 32 parts of the body, the brain is not mentioned in the Texts, 32 parts taken as repulsive or as elements, detailed talk on how to practice, attainments reached in this meditation and corrections. 
Paragraphs: 36-60.








Tape 17: Discussion of the tenfold skill in giving attention in relation to the meditation on the 32 parts of the body, importance of balancing energy and concentration, preparing for practice, apprehension of the sign, defining repulsiveness in five ways, review of each body part, development of jh?na on these parts of the body, benefits of meditation, corrections and questions.
Paragraphs: 61-144.

Tape 18: Introductory remarks on mindfulness of breathing meditation, praise by the Buddha of ?n?p??asati, the four methods for ?n?p??asati, defining of words in the text about ?n?p??asati, ?n?p??asati is quite sublime and quite peaceful initially as well as at the level of penetration, Abhayagiri Monastery, three kinds of abandonment of unwholesome mental states, addressed to bhikkhus but includes others, Four Noble Persons in Buddha・s dispensation only, all Buddhas practice ?n?p??asati, practice needs quiet place, sitting posture is best, the ways breathing is long or short, meaning of ass?sa and pass?sa, breath body, ．tranquillizing・ of bodily formations, how breath becomes more subtle with greater concentration, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 145-185.

Tape 19: ．Mental objects・ should be dhamma objects, learning the meditation subject in five ways, appan?, counting in detail, the causes of the air element, connection or following, proof of the meaning of ass?sa, touching, fixing; similes of the man who cannot walk, the gate-keeper and the saw; object becomes more subtle in ?n?p??asati with development, seven kinds of people who do not breathe, signs differ, should a yogi be told he has apprehended the sign, after jh?nas change to vipassan?, stages of vipassan? in brief, reviewing, how p?ti is to be taken as vedan? in paragraph 229, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 186-230.

Tape 20: Discussion of the third tetrad, sam?dhi, jh?na, kha?ika sam?dhi, liberating the mind, dissolution, impermanence, discussion of the fourth tetrad, attha, bheda, Nibb?na is not fading away, 3 kinds of abandonment, giving up and entering into, relinquishment, Commentaries are to be relied upon for interpretation of Suttas, what Magga eradicates, story of Arahant who knew when he would die, Recollection of Peace, sabh?va, time, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 231-251.
                           
                                     Chapter Nine

Tape 21: The meanings of ．brahm? vih?ra and mett?, seeing the danger in hate and the advantage in patience, the persons that mett? should not be directed to at the beginning of the practice, one begins with oneself as an example, the practice is extended to a teacher or respected person, practice towards a hostile person, how to eliminate resentment, the lives of the Bodhisatta as inspiration, breaking the barriers between the four persons, 528 ways of loving-kindness, the meanings of ．satta・, ．puggala・, and ．putta・, corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-54.

Tape 22: Review of practice of loving-kindness meditation, explanation of phrases used in mett? meditation, karu?? meditation and its objects, mudit? meditation and its objects, how to practice upekkh? meditation, jh?nas obtained through brahm? vih?ras, fourth or fifth jh?nas only through upekkh? meditation, skill in non-existent or in concept helpful in developing ar|p?vacara jh?nas, p?ramit?s, corrections.
Paragraphs: 55-124.









                                        Chapter Ten

Tape 23: How to develop the first ar|p?vacara jh?na, r|pa sa???, perceptions of resistance, story of ?l?ra K?l?ma, perceptions of variety, surmounting and non-attention, ?k?s?na?c?yatana, vi????a?c?yatana, ?ki?ca???yatana, nevasa??an?sa???yatana, two functions of sa???, mental factors of fourth ar|p?vacara jh?na can be seen only in groups not individually, corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-64.

                                       Chapter 11

Tape 24: Four kinds of ?h?ra, dangers of the four nutriments, similes on four ?h?ras, how to develop perception of repulsiveness in food in ten ways, why jh?na is not obtained in this meditation, pari??a, four elements as meditation subject, simile of cow, discussion of up?di??a, four elements are results of four causes not kamma alone, characteristics of the four elements, four kinds of fire element, six kinds of wind element, peyy?la, relating the four element meditation to 32 parts of the body, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-83.

Tape 25: The four elements are related to 20 parts of the body as earth, 12 parts of the body as water, four components as fire, and six components as air in brief taken as a whole; the four elements are related to each of the 42 components one by one; the elements are given attention as to word meaning, by groups, by particles, by characteristic etc., as to how originated, as to variety and unity, as to separability and inseparability, as to similar and dissimilar, as to distinction between internal and external, as to inclusion, as to condition, as to lack of conscious reaction, as to analysis of conditions; the elements in walking meditation, benefits of meditation and corrections.
Paragraphs: 84-126.


                                   Chapter 12

Tape 25: The five abhi???, eight jh?nas and eight kasi?as are needed for direct knowledge, references for stories, success by intervention of knowledge, stories of those protected by the intervention of concentration or the intervention of knowledge and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-44.

Tape 26: Directions for entering abhi???, four bases of success, consciousness with barriers and without barriers, Pa?isambhid?magga, creation of multiple images, thought processes connected with abhi???, story of Venerable C|?a Panthaka, appearing and vanishing, Buddha preaches Abhidhamma in Tavati?s? realm, story of Venerable Yasa and his father, Twin Miracle, story of Venerable Mahinda, story of Venerable Mahaka, the Brahm? Baka, opinions of Elder Tipi?aka C|?a Abhaya, ．Dependence・ for monks, walking on water, traveling in the air, opinion of Elder Tipi?aka C|?a N?ga, story of Venerable Mah? Moggall?na and Nandopananda, kamma-born r|pa cannot be enlarged and corrections.
Paragraphs 45-118.

Tape 27: The manner of wielding bodily mastery in the Brahm? World, occurrence of such powers after the time of the Buddha, making the near far and the far near, stories of the Buddha and monks using these powers, making much little and little much, stories about these powers, conversion of mind to accord with body and the reverse, explanation of blissful perception and light perception, created images, supernormal powers possible without enlightenment, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 119-139.

                                         Chapter 13

Tape 27: Divine ear, three abidings, how to practice, penetration of mind, how to practice, discussion of cittas in relation to certain mental factors, five kinds of deliverance, recollection of past lives, who remembers and how many lives remembered, how to practice, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-27.

Tape 28: Cycles of destruction and reformation of worlds, 31 plaanes of existence; fields of birth, authority and scope; destruction by fire, water and air; how names for sun (suriya) and moon (canda) came to be; the divine eye, seeing passing away and reappearing, death and rebirth moments cannot be seen by divine eye, reviling Noble Ones in any way is weighty kamma, seeking forgiveness, seven kinds of direct knowledge and their objects; present by moment, present by continuity and present by extent; internal and external objects not taken simultaneously and corrections.
Paragraphs: 28-129.

                                          Chapter 14

Tape 29: Definition of pa???, three kinds of knowing, simile indicating Buddha did difficult thing in seeing this; characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause of pa???; the different kinds of understanding; four kinds of discrimination, attha, P??i language, seven kinds of purification, r|pa, primary and depending r|pa, tangibility, eye and ear taking object before it reaches them, appearances of the sensitivities, comparative similes to animals, femininity and masculinity faculties, life faculty, heart-base and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1- 60.

Tape 30: Bodily intimation, verbal intimation; space; lightnesss, malleability and wieldiness of matter; growth and continuity of matter, Buddha・s teaching always accorded with susceptibility of listener, aging; physical nutriment; torpor is not matter, water element cannot be touched; characteristics of matter not caused by anything; feeling aggregate, consicousness aggregate, different sequence of cittas in Visuddhi Magga and Abhidhammatthasangaha, discussion of n?ma, discussion of vatthu-k?ma and kilesa-k?ma, sa~kh?ra as prior effort; relinking, life-continuum and death cittas are all the same type and corrections.
Paragraphs: 61-124.


Tape 31: Feeling aggregate, explanation of feelings connected with five senses, perception, sa~kh?ra aggregate; division into constant, inconstant and whatever; phassa; discussion of individual cetasikas, correction of translation of hiri and ottappa; three kinds of manasik?ra; the different treatment of cetasikas in Manual of Abhidhamma and Visuddhi Magga and corrections.
Paragraphs: 125-184.

Tape 32: Definition of all materiality; materiality with respect to extent, continuity, period and moment; kamma-born matter not classified as to past etc., Sub-Commentator suggests past, etc. with regard to sex change; 4 kinds of internal, external, inferior & superior, far & near; aggregate even if only one; feeling with respect to certain qualities; warning not to mix classifications; constant with regard to results, 5 grievous offenses; orders of arising, abandoning, plane & teaching; aggregates & aggregates of clinging, similes and corrections.
Paragraphs: 185-230.

                                                  Chapter 15
Tape 32: Bases and word definitions, dhamma should be used instead of mental data, simile of the 6 senses, meaning of mind base and dhamma base and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-16.

Tape 33: Nine meanings of dh?tu, 18 elements in reality; composition of dhamma element, mano dh?tu, mano vi????a dh?tu; how the dh?tus should be viewed and corrections.
Paragraphs: 17-43.

                                                  Chapter 16
Tape 33: 22 faculties, discussion of three kinds of supramundane faculty understanding, the five meanings of indriya, planes where faculties occur; comparison of bases, elements and faculties; word definitions of Four Noble Truths and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-31.

Tape 34: Definitions of j?ti, three kinds of dukkha; definitions of aging, death, sorrow, lamentation, despair; association with unloved, separation from the loved; not to get what is unobtainable; craving is origin of dukkha; Third Noble Truth; explanation of asesavir?ganirodho, discussion of Nibb?na, questions and answers about Nibb?na, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 32-74.

Tape 35: The factors of Path, cessation and the Path, abandonment of wrong views (the Overlord, Basic Principle, Time, Nature), Noble Eightfold Path divided according to s?la, sam?dhi and pa???, similarity and dissimilarity between the Four Noble Truths and corrections. 
Paragraphs: 75-104.

                                         Chapter 17

Tape 35: Definition of Pa?iccasamupp?da and parts of that word (pa?icca, sam and upp?da), four meanings of Pa?iccasamupp?da.
Paragraphs: 1-20 (Handout).

Tape 36: Meaning of idappaccayat?, Pa?iccasamupp?da does not mean simply arising, difficulty of teaching Pa?iccasamupp?da, different ways the Buddha taught Pa?iccasamupp?da, why avijj? is at the beginning of the formula, definition of avijj?, definition of sa~kh?ra, r|pa is aby?kata, no theory & wrong theory, avijj? according to Sutta & Abhidhamma, two triads of sa~kh?ra, root, object, predominance, proximity & contiguity, and corrections. 
Paragraphs: 1-76.
Tape 37: How ignorance is related to formations by way of conditions, multiple fruit from multiple causes, why ignorance alone is given, how opposites may condition each other, not knowing and knowing incorrectly specific & general characteristics, formations condition resultant consciousness at pa?isandhi & pavatti, some say tad?ramma?a may arise once, different sequences happy & unhappy destiny, 4 kinds of birth, materiality groups, rebirth & anatta, no unpleasant objects in Devaloka & Brahm? World and corrections.
Paragraphs: 101-185.

Tape 38: Meanings of n?ma and r|pa, where n?ma and r|pa occur, 4 kinds of rebirth, groups of materiality at rebirth, rebirth citta does not originate r|pa, beings with respect to aggregates, ekeasesa and n?ma-r|pa, pa??h?na & vi????a paccaya n?ma-r|pa, meaning of sal?yatana, pa??h?na & n?ma-r|pa paccaya sal?yatana, explanation of purej?ta, kinds of feeling, 108 kinds of craving, rite and ritual clinging, Arahants & Buddhas have feeling but no craving, wheel of becoming can be broken between feeling & craving only, kamma-becoming & rebirth-becoming, 4 methods of treating Dependent Origination and corrections.
Paragraphs: 186-314.

                                     Chapter 18

Tape 39: Relating the chapters thus far to s?la, sam?dhi and pa???, defining n?ma-r|pa, samatha yogi may define n?ma first, how he defines n?ma-r|pa, not necessary to see all r|pa in actual practice, vipassan? yogi must define r|pa first, discerning n?ma-r|pa does not come at beginning of practice, only mundane n?ma is taken by vipassan?; defining n?ma-r|pa in relation to elements, bases, aggregates; if n?ma not clear, try to see r|pa more clearly; seeing n?ma through phassa, vedan? and citta; there is only n?ma-r|pa; similes of chariot, etc., must avoid eternity and annihilation views; seeing individual essence & common characteristics, interdependence of n?ma-r|pa; simile of blind man and cripple; knowing of mind and matter must be experienced and corrections.
Paragraphs 1-37.

                                  Chapter 19

Tape 39: Purification by Overcoming Doubt, seeing causes of n?ma-r|pa, 16 kinds of doubt, what is common to all and what is not common to all,
and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-8.



Tape 40: Outline of subject matter of this chapter; no kamma in fruit and no fruit in kamma; 4 causes of r|pa and when r|pa is produced by them; discerning n?ma-r|pa by means of round of kamma and round of kamma-result; different classifications of kamma; seeing through induction; correct view given in verses; similes for kamma and results; continuity of consciousness between death and rebirth; King Milinda and the gap in distance but not in time; the C|?a-Sot?panna and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-27.

                                    Chapter 20

Tape 40: The Purification of Knowledge and Vision of What is the Path and What is not the Path, comprehension by groups; full understanding as the known, full understanding as investigating, full understanding as abandoning; we must be mindful of what is obvious or prominent; impermanence in sense of destruction, painful in the sense of terror, not self in the sense of having no core and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1-19.

Tape 41: Individual and common characteristics of phenomena; inductive insight is inferential; applying inductive insight to matter by comprehension of groups in 11 ways; arising of materiality at birth; cessation of materiality at death; 6 kinds of kamma-born matter, 5 kinds of citta-born matter; citta and posture; nutriment on body can produce matter; matter strongest at presence; 4 reasons why something is dukkha, 4 reasons why something is anatta; buddha cannot change the characteristics of dhammas; attributing the three characteristics to different time periods; Mah?si・s warning about inferential vipassan?; the verses; ．putting on・ and corrections. 
Paragraphs: 20-75.

Tape 42: Introductory remarks on seeing mind and matter; seeing the Immaterial Septad by groups, pairs, moments, series, removal of false view, abolition of conceit and ending of attachment; to see clearly no sense of ．I・ or ．self・ should be present in the observation; Contemplation of Rise and Fall in brief and in detail; 3 kinds of present; birth, aging and death do not have birth, aging and death; seeing rise and fall in 5 ways, in the Noble Truths, in Dependent Origination; the four methods used to see Dependent Origination correctly; the characteristic of individual essence and what is formed; only rise and fall evident to yogi, not present; phenomena are alway new and short-lived; 10 impediments and corrections.
Paragraphs: 76-130.

                                        Chapter 21

Tape 43: Review of preceding vipassan? stages; Purification of Knowledge and Vision of Way; after impediments fade mature seeing of rise and fall appears; why 3 characteristics not apparent; attributes of 3 characteristics; 3 characteristics not included in the 5 aggregates; Knowledge of Contemplation of Dissolution; 3 kinds of abandonment; Knowledge of Appearance as Terror; yogi sees as terror without fear; Knowledge of Contemplation of Danger; Chaddanta; Knowledge of Dispassion; Desire for Deliverance; R?hu; Knowledge of Contemplation of Reflection; Simile of the Snake; Discerning Formations as void and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1- 60.

Tape 44: Review of the stages of  vipassan? knowledge, the simile of the snake; discerning formations and attributing the 3 characteristics to them; abandoning terror and delight; Knowledge of Equanimity about Formations; formations arise until Nibb?na is seen as peaceful; Insight Leading to Emergence of Path; one does not know beforehand Path will arise; Path thought process; the signless, desireless, void; contemplation of impermanence brings faith, of pain brings tranquility, of void brings wisdom; preceding vipassan? contemplation of signless, desireless, void will result in Path and Fruit being likewise; signless is not mentioned in Abhidhamma; 7 kinds of Noble Persons; how a yogi becomes enlightened; the 12 similes; number of Path or enlightenment factors may vary with jh?na; 3 opinion of how quality of Path is determined by jh?nas; progress; 5 reasons for Path getting its names; how Path and Fruit can be signless according to Suttanta method; and corrections.
Paragraphs: 49-128. 

Tape 45: Path Thought Process; Insight leading to emergence, and corrections.
Paragraphs: 128 - 136.

                                          Chapter 22

Tape 45: Gotrabhu; Formations are external to Nibb?na and Nibb?na is external to yogi; two objects are taken in Path thought process; simile of leaping across stream; Fruit is ak?liko; discussion of number of Phala moments; Noble Persons; reflections after enlightenment; Venerable Mah?n?ma; 37/14 states associated with enlightenment; different groups and names of 37 factors of enlightenment; emergence from sign and from occurrence; discussion of Right Thought (vitakka); coupling of powers; and corrections.
Paragraphs: 1 - 46.

Tape 46: Brief remarks on fetters, defilements, wrongnesses, worldly states (approval and resentment towards these states), five kinds of avarice, perversions, ties, bad ways, cankers and their range, hindrances, clingings, inherent tendencies; difference between anusaya and kilesa; unprofitable courses of action, stains, unproftable cittas; abandonment of the respective members of these groups by the Path cittas; the expression ．only・; Path Knowledge does not abandon what is past, future or present; the first set of four uppanna; objects not observed with vipassan? can be taken by the defilements; Path eradicates the liability to have defilements; the second set of four uppanna; which uppanna can and cannot be abandoned by Path; four functions of Path with respect to the Four Noble Truths and corrections.
Paragraphs: 47-103.

Tape 47: 4 functions of the 4 Noble Truths; 3 kinds of full understanding; 3 kinds of abandoning; only hindrances mentioned but all distractions to meditation must be taken; mundane and supramundande realization in threefold division and corrections.
Paragraphs: 104 - 129.

                                          Chapter 23

Tape 47: 4 benefits of meditation; what Fruition is, who can and cannot attain it, purpose of attaining Fruition, how it is attained, three ways it is made to last, emergence from it comes in two ways, discussion of Fruition in the thought processes, the opinions of some teachers about Fruition; discussion of what the cessation of attainment is, who may and may not attain it, where it may be attianed, why it is attained, how it is attained; the four preparatory tasks; how it is made to last and emergence, and corrections.
Paragraphs 1 - 49.



